Preferences of People with Vision Impairment with Respect to Visibility of Elements in the Built Environment Mei Ying Boon1,2,3(B) and Byoung Sun Chu2,4 1 University of Canberra, Canberra, ACT 2617, Australia MeiYing.Boon@canberra.edu.au 2 University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia 3 University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 4 Daegu Catholic University, Gyeongsan, Korea Abstract. The qualities of the built environment impact on the ability of people with vision impairment to move safely through the environment. It is important to revisit the evidence of the relationship between vision and the visibility of elements in the built environment to ensure accessibility standards and design guidelines are consistent with the latest evidence base. This paper reviews mixed method (qualitative and quantitative) research into visual and non-visual factors known to be implicated in injurious incidents in people with vision impairment. The evi- dence base for the visibility of simulated and real environmental elements such as stairs, doors, door handles, light switches, tactile ground surface indicators, traffic cones, road line markings and pedestrians will be reviewed. The evidence sug- gests that luminance contrasts of approximately 2.5× current contrast standards, as current standards vary, would allow people with up to severe vision impairment to see objects of the dimensions of tactile ground surface indicators with ease. If people who are categorised as being blind by WHO are considered, about 3× current contrast standards may be required. If lower contrasts are used, alternative provisions should be made to assist people with vision impairment to navigate the space safely. Keywords: Visibility · Built environment · Contrast · Vision impairment · Low vision Moderate to severe vision impairment affects 1 billion people globally [1]. While 949.7 million people may be helped with spectacle correction, there are 875 million people remaining who are significantly vision impaired due to disease or trauma. The moder- ate and severe categories of vision impairment (VI) are defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) according to visual acuity (VA), the ability to resolve fine detail. Individuals who have presenting Snellen VAs of 6/18 to better than 6/60, 6/60 to better than 6/120 and worse than 6/120 are categorised as having moderate VI, severe VI and blindness respectively. A person with normal vision can resolve details which subtend a visual angular subtense of 1 min of arc, hence the Snellen VAs of 6/18, 6/60 and 6/120 may be interpreted as requiring a person to be about 3x, 10x and 20x closer respectively © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021 N. L. Black et al. (Eds.): IEA 2021, LNNS 220, pp. 715–722, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74605-6_90 than a person with normal vision (take the inverse of the VA fraction) in order to see the same detail as a person with normal vision. Although the WHO categories of vision impairment reference VA, other qualities of vision may also be affected. Table 1 provides example data from people with VI that fall into different WHO categories. It is evident that individuals who have similar levels of VA may experience other vision deficits to a different extent (Table 1). Table 1. Examples of patients with vision impairment ranging from mild, moderate and severe WHO categories of vision impairment, indicated by lightest to darkest grey shading respectively. Luminance contrast thresholds were recorded with either the MARS chart (own data) or the Colour Detective Test (UNSW Colour Vision Suite). Chromatic contrast thresholds were recorded using either the Cambridge Colour Trivector Test (AMD participants) or the Colour Detective Test. Condition n Age (years) Binocular VA (6/6 is normal) Visual field loss Luminance contrast threshold Red-green contrast threshold Blue-yellow contrast threshold Optic Neuropathy [2] 1 29 6/8 Periphera l > central loss Normal 2x worse than normal 2x worse than normal Retinitis Pigmentosa [2] 8 33.9 (17–70) 6/23 (6/12–6/379) Peripheral > central loss Normal to 3x worse than normal 3–13x worse than normal 2.5–12x worse than normal AMD (own data) 1 72 6/24 Central > peripheral loss Normal 1.2x worse than normal 3x worse than normal Corneal Dystrophy [2] 1 44 6/44 Central deficit Normal 3.5x worse than normal 9x worse than normal Cone-rod Dystrophy [2] 1 58 6/46 Central > peripheral loss Normal Normal 2x worse than normal AMD (own data) 1 77 6/72 Central > peripheral loss 7x worse than normal Could not see CCT stimulus Could not see CCT stimulus Stargardt Disease [2] 1 56 6/91 Not assessed 4x worse than normal 11x worse than normal 15x worse than normal Why is altered perception of the built environment a problem? One reason is personal safety. Studies have shown that people with VI are more susceptible to injury. Incidents such as slips, trips, falls, collisions, traffic incidents result in soft-tissue injuries, fractures, head trauma, lacerations, twisting injuries, burns/scalds and sporting injuries [3, 4]. These injurious or near miss incidents occurred in a variety of environments, but significantly, most occurred within the built environment including at their own home or relative's home, on roads, footpaths, workplace, car park, shopping centre, hospital cafeteria, town hall and medical centre [3, 4]. Of concern, these patients had already consulted an eye care practitioner. Even for hospitalised patients, after adjusting for age, history of falls and use of walking aids, VI was found to significantly increase risk of falls. Falling is associated with injuries, fear of falling, loss of independence and death in one third of elderly (>65 year old) patients [5]. For these reasons, it is important to consider what can be done from the design standpoint to reduce risk of injury in people with VI. Another reason that altered perception of the built environment is a problem is being unable to identify building elements, which can leave users feeling lost and wandering around trying to determine where to go, resulting in inefficiencies in orientation and mobility [6]. People with VI already experience high levels of fatigue due to the high cognitive load required to function with the impaired sense of vision; "paying attention to the environment and orientation in the surrounding environment" is fatiguing [7]. Facilitating ability to negotiate the environment by improving the visibility of building elements would improve the useability and enjoyment of spaces. Accessibility standards have been designed to guide architects and builders to meet the needs of users of the built environment, however there are discrepancies between standards. To address this larger aim of improving accessibility and safety for people with VI as they navigate the built environment, the purpose of this paper is to revisit the evidence of the visibility of elements in the built environment for people with VI. Which Visual Characteristics of the Built Environment Are of Relevance? In improving the visibility of elements of the built environment, we seek to improve the ability of people with VI to identify and safely navigate elements of the built environment. Is improving visibility of elements of the built environment a useful approach? In a mixed methods prospective study of injurious incidents and near misses in older people (>60 years) with VI, participants who experienced an incident were asked to describe what visual and non-visual aspects they thought contributed to their near miss or incident [3]. The most frequently cited causative factors were contrast, depth perception, not seeing, central blur, dark/light adaptation problems and poor peripheral vision. Further, the same patients identified potential factors for prevention as using colour and pattern contrast, avoiding the use of transparent materials, improving balance, reducing clutter, modifying lighting (sunglasses and turning lights on), improving awareness of what is around them and learning to use peripheral vision. The quantitative analysis in the same group confirmed that poor contrast sensitivity and poor high contrast visual acuity were key visual predictors of incident occurrence in that group [3]. Good general fitness and health were also important to prevent incidents resulting in injury [3]. These results suggest that improving the contrast sensitivity of patients, such as by improving lighting or modification of the contrast of objects in the built environment, or increasing the size of objects observed, such as through the use of magnifying low vision aids, or coming closer to an object, are two key ways to improve visibility of elements in the built environment. Is there any support for the notion that improving the contrast of objects has tangible benefits for orientation, mobility and personal safety? Home modifications have been found to prevent falls, with less clear evidence for other kinds of incidents, principally due to a lack of studies examining this issue [8, 9]. In Keall et al.'s study, aimed at preventing falls in older people but not specifically targeted at people with VI, two out of the eight interventions applied were aimed at improving visibility (improving lighting and using high contrast step edgings); the other interventions were designed to improving the levelness and slip-resistance of the walking surface or the provision of grab and handrails. Higher quality studies are required to evaluate interventions for other incidents apart from those on the falls causal pathway. Contrast This paper will focus on the quality of contrast. Accessibility standards such as AS 1428.1–2009 and AS 1428.4.1–2009 in Australia, BS 8300: 2009 in the United Kingdom [10–13], and 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design in the United States of America and the users of such standards, recognise the importance of contrast to support access and safety for individuals in public spaces. However, the evidence-base for contrast requirements that are stated in current standards is unclear and there are several equations currently in use to calculate contrast. Contrast describes a difference in the quality of two or more things. To vision scien- tists, luminance contrast and chromatic contrast are commonly calculated as Weber or Michelson contrasts. Weber contrast is useful when there is an object against a background and is calculated as (Intensity of the object – Intensity of the back- ground)/Intensity of the background. Michelson contrast is a useful measure for patterns where two elements alternate and is calculated as (Maximum intensity Minimum intensity)/(Maximum intensity + Minimum intensity). Accessibility standards provide minimum requirements for creating more accessible environments for people with disabilities, including people with VI. Within the acces- sibility and building code literature, contrast is calculated in different ways, which may impact on final outcomes in the selection of materials for building by architects, builders and designers [14]. For example, ISO21542 and ISO23599 calculate Weber contrast in the way described above multiplied by 100 to convert it into a percentage, however as light levels approach zero, intrinsic noise (a) within the visual system changes the per- ception of contrast by increasing the denominator value to (Intensity of the background + a) so alternatives have been suggested. In the accessibility literature, Michelson con- trast has been defined the same as used by vision scientists, but multiplied by 100 to convert to a percentage (e.g. ISO21542). However, it has also been used with a different denominator, described as the average of the elements (Maximum intensity + Minimum intensity)/2 and multiplied by 100 to convert it into a percentage (AS/NZA 1428.4). Another modification of the Michelson equation is known as the Bowman-Sapolinski equation where contrast is defined as a percentage as (125(Y2 Y1)/(Y2 + Y1 + 25)) where Y1 and Y2 are the luminance reflectances of the 2 surfaces. The variation is an attempt to account for the fact that at low average luminance, greater contrast is necessary to achieve equal visibility. Regardless of which measure of contrast is used, it is possible to convert between the methods of calculating contrast, so the important question is what contrasts support visibility of building elements for people with VI, acknowledging that VI may range from mild to blindness. Studies have investigated this question using a variety of approaches. Dain et al. reported an investigation into luminance contrast preferences using digital simulations of building elements of realistic visual angle that varied only in luminance contrast, not colour or shading [15]. The simulated representations were of door frames, door handles, light switches and stairs with nosings presented on a tablet computer. Participants with and without VI were asked to rate the visibility of each element on a four point scale, (1) not visible, (2) poorly visible, (3) easily visible and (4) extremely visible. Higher Michelson contrasts were associated with greater visibility ratings by participants. Further, participants with poorer high contrast VA required higher levels of contrast for each of the ratings. Two other trends were observed; elements that were larger or had fewer horizontal than vertical elements required lower contrast levels to be rated as "easily visible" than smaller objects or those that had a high proportion of hori- zontal elements. The latter is suggestive of a horizontal effect, which has been observed previously [16–18]. For people with normal contrast sensitivity (1.8) as measured on the MARS letter chart, the elements were rated as easily visible with Michelson contrasts ranging from 15–20%. For people with contrast sensitivity of at least 1.5 and 1.0 this changed to 15–31% and 22–48% respectively. For the people with the poorest contrast sensitivity, 33–69% contrast was required. Participants with moderate and severe VI required elements with 22% and 30% contrast to be rated easily visible. For the par- ticipants with the poorest vision, 69% was required. A limitation of the study is that it was a simulation and restricted to grey scale with uniform luminance, whereas building elements in the real world are more colourful and illuminated unevenly. However, the strength of the study is that it isolated the question to that of luminance contrast and shape. Lukman et al. conducted a mixed methods study using real building elements com- monly used by architects, builders and designers in a controlled laboratory environment (average of 230 lx room illumination) focusing on door frames [19] and tactile ground surface indicators (TGSIs) [14]. The latter are designed to provide both visual and hap- tic information as warning elements about hazardous changes in level, such as steps, ramps, for people with VI as they walk around. The luminances of the TGSIs and panels were measured and contrast calculated using the Bowman Sapolinski equation (Stan- dards Australia, 2014) using light reflectance values. Luminance contrast ranged from 7 (stainless steel TSI on a timber background) to 90% (black TGSI on a white background). Building elements were rated using a rating scale from a distance of 1.5 m as (1) not visible at all, (2) poorly visible, (3) easily visible and (4) extremely easily visible. Visual detection and identification distance was assessed. Participants were required to walk towards the TGSI from a starting distance of 6 m and stop when they could first detect the TGSI and then identify it as a TGSI. The key findings were that people who had normal to severe levels of VI were all able to detect and identify all the TGSI/background combinations from approximately 5 to 6 m. However, people categorised as blind by the WHO needed to be closer, between 2 and 4 m, to achieve the same. The lower the contrast, the closer the required visual detection and identification distances. Lighting impacted on the relative visibility of the stainless steel TGSIs. Overall, people with mild to severe VI rated these real combinations from a distance of 1.5 m as easily visible when the elements had Bowman Sapolinski contrasts ranging from 35–66% for the TGSIs [14] and from 18–55% for door frames [19]. People who were categorised as blind by the WHO, rated elements from 77–90% for the TGSIs [14] and 62–100% for the door frames [19] as easily visible. The study showed overall that higher luminance contrasts benefit people categorised with blindness more than people with mild to severe VI as it allowed them to see the building element from longer distances away with greater ease. Colour Considerations Colour was found to have modified the order of visibility of the TGSI building elements from strictly following the order of luminance contrast in Lukman et al.'s study [14], however the impact of colour vision deficits on visibility of colourful elements could not be analysed due to the few participants who could see the Cambridge Colour Test stimulus, likely due to vision issues such as poor VA or poor visual fields impacting on their ability to do the test [19]. Lukman concluded from qualitative data that colour contrast aided people who had poor luminance contrast sensitivity to see building ele- ments if they had sufficient luminance contrast sensitivity, agreeing with Legge et al., who stated that "readers rely on information conveyed by color contrast or luminance contrast, whichever yields the best performance" [20]. Additional clues as to the impact of colour on the preferences of people with VI with respect to elements within the built environment may be gained from a study which investigated ability to navigate in a virtual environment [2, 21]. In that study, most of the participants with VI could complete a different colour vision test, the Colour Detective Test [22]. The participants with VI navigated four virtual scenarios. They (1) slalomed between red and white horizontally striped traffic cones on a grey footpath, (2) walked down a grey footpath and avoided stationary pedestrians wearing yellow and black clothing, (3) followed a yellow line on a grey footpath and (4) walked down a grey footpath and avoided moving pedestrians wearing red and black clothing. Participants who had both poor luminance contrast sensitivity and chromatic contrast sensitivity had greater difficulty than people who had only poor luminance contrast sensitivity. The effect was colour-specific. Participants who had luminance contrast and blue-yellow vision deficits found task 3 difficult and participants who had luminance contrast and red- green colour vision deficiencies found pedestrian avoidance more difficult. Therefore, as red-green and blue-yellow contrast sensitivity deficits are a common characteristic of people with VI, colour contrast is a less reliable way of ensuring visibility than the use of high levels of luminance contrast in building elements for people with VI. Conclusions Collectively, the above findings support the use of luminance contrast requirements for accessibility standards. Lukman et al.'s (2020) findings provide the strongest evidence that real life building elements may be evaluated in terms of visibility using visibility rating scales and detection and identification distances and evaluated against equations used by accessibility standards to calculate contrast. Converting measures between the different contrast levels is possible however it requires knowledge of the original light reflectance values of the two elements, particularly when using the Bowman-Sapolinski equation for contrast. The results also suggest that there should be greater uniformity in the measures of contrast employed to provide greater certainty for designers when checking against the evidence. The evidence suggests that luminance contrasts of approx- imately 2.5x current contrast standards would allow people with up to severe VI to see objects of the dimensions of TGSIs with ease from 1.5 m. If people who are categorised as being blind by WHO are considered, about 3x current contrast standards may be required. If lower contrasts are used, alternative provisions should be made to assist people with VI to navigate and move around the space safely. If building elements are of insufficient contrast for a person with VI to see easily, moving to a closer distance can improve its visibility, but this is at the expense of time and energy needed to move around to search for the object, during which time the person would be at increased risk of injurious incidents. As VI is more prevalent in the elderly, this increased risk is borne by the most vulnerable in our population. References World Health Organisation. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness- and-visual-impairment. Accessed 10 Nov 2020 Knopf, N.A., Boon, M.Y., Suaning, G.J., Zapf, M.P.H., Grigg, J.: Initial mobility behaviors of people with visual impairment in a virtual environment using a mixed methods design. In: 2017 IEEE Life Sciences Conference, Sydney, pp. 153–156 (2017) Boon, M.Y., Chu, B.S., Lee, P.C., Chiang, T.J., Alshamli, N., Alghamdi, W., Lai, J., Yeung, W., Bridge, C.: Perceptions of older people regarding their vision and incident causation. Optom. Vis. Sci. 92(10), 995–1002 (2015) Wood, J.M., Lacherez, P., Black, A.A., Cole, M.H., Boon, M.Y., Kerr, G.K.: Risk of falls, injurious falls, and other injuries resulting from visual impairment among older adults with age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 52(8), 5088–5092 (2011) Ambrose, A.F., Paul, G., Hausdorff, J.M.: Risk factors for falls among older adults: a review of the literature. Maturitas 75(1), 51–61 (2013) Chang, K.J., Dillon, L.L., Deverell, L., Boon, M.Y., Keay, L.: Orientation and mobility outcome measures. Clin. Exp. Optom. 103(4), 434–448 (2020) Schakel, W., Bode, C., van der Aa, H.P.A., Hulshof, C.T.J., Bosmans, J.E., van Rens, G.H.M.B., van Nispen, R.M.A.: Exploring the patient perspective of fatigue in adults with visual impairment: a qualitative study. BMJ Open 7(8), 1–8 (2017) Sherrington, C., Fairhall, N., Wallbank, G., Tiedemann, A., Michaleff, Z.A., Howard, K., Clemson, L., Hopewell, S., Lamb, S.: Exercise for preventing falls in older people living in the community: an abridged Cochrane systematic review. Br. J. Sports Med. 54(15), 885–891 (2020) Keall, M.D., Pierse, N., Howden-Chapman, P., Cunningham, C., Cunningham, M., Guria, J., Baker, M.G.: Home modifications to reduce injuries from falls in the home injury prevention intervention (HIPI) study: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385(9964), 231–238 (2015) Standards Australia: AS 1428.4 Design for access and mobility part 4: tactile ground surface indicators for the orientation of people with vision impairment (2009) Standards Australia: AS/NZS 1428.4.1 Design for access and mobility part 4.1: means to assist the orientation of people with vision impairment - tactile ground surface indicators (2009) British Standards Institution.: BS8300 Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled people - code of practice (2009) Bright, K., Cook, G.: The Colour, Light and Contrast Manual: Designing and Managing Inclusive Built Environments. Wiley, Hoboken (2010) Lukman, A.L., Bridge, C., Dain, S.J., Boon, M.Y.: Luminance contrast of accessible tactile indicators for people with visual impairment. Ergon. Des. 28(2), 4–15 (2020) Dain, S.J., Manadhar, S., Boon, M.Y.: Luminance contrast preferences for the visual impaired in the built environment. In: American Academy of Optometry Annual Meeting, Orlando (2016) Essock, E.A., DeFord, J.K., Hansen, B.C., Sinai, M.J.: Oblique stimuli are seen best (not worst!) in naturalistic broad-band stimuli: a horizontal effect. Vis. Res. 43(12), 1329–1335 (2003) Hansen, B.C., Essock, E.A.: A horizontal bias in human visual processing of orientation and its correspondence to the structural components of natural scenes. J Vis. 4(12), 1044–1060 (2004) Yap, T.P., Luu, C.D., Suttle, C.M., Chia, A., Boon, M.Y.: Electrophysiological and psy- chophysical studies of meridional anisotropies in children with and without astigmatism. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 60(5), 1906 1913 (2019) Lukman, A.L.: Developing design criteria based on visual perception of people with visual impairment using contrast cues, Ph.D. thesis. The University of New South Wales, Sydney (2017) Legge, G.E., Parish, D.H., Luebker, A., Wurm, L.E.: Psychophysics of reading. XI. Comparing color contrast and luminance contrast. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 7(10), 2002–2010 (1990) Knopf, N.A., Zapf, M.P., Suaning, G., Grigg, J., Bodduluri, L., Boon, M.Y.: Mobility perfor- mance in a virtual reality maze is related to luminance and chromatic sensitivity in people with vision impairment. In: CIE Australia Lighting Research Conference 2020. CIE Australia, Brisbane (2020) Bodduluri, L., Boon, M.Y., Ryan, M., Dain, S.J.: Normative values for a tablet computer-based application to assess chromatic contrast sensitivity. Behav. Res. Methods 50(2), 673–683 (2018)