Design for All Senses: Architecture and Cognitive Learning for the Visually Impaired Lim Poh Im and Khoo Qian Sang Abstract The paper discusses potential improvements of building spaces to aid cognitive learning of visually impaired persons. It begins with identification of sensory perceptions of the visually impaired, i.e. how the five senses are used in navigation, followed by challenges encountered in pedagogy and cognitive learning. This paper combines interviews with blind individuals and field observations carried out at the Malaysia Association for the Blind (MAB), Kuala Lumpur. The partici- pants of this research consists of members of the MAB and a few other individuals. Findings revealed their the unique experiences, the role of sensory features, and the connections between architecture elements and cognitive learning of the visually impaired. The paper ends with a discussion on possible improvement to the design and conditions of their learning spaces. Keywords Design for visually impaired · Architecture for visual impairment · Cognitive learning spaces for the visually impaired Introduction Architecture is commonly taken as a visual phenomena. The non-visual aspects of architecture however, appears to be utmost important to people with visual impair- ment, due to their special and unique sets of needs. These special needs ought to be recognized and be incorporated in special education, and in the design of their learning spaces. In Malaysia, recent statistics have shown that only one percent of the population had undergone special education compared to the global estimates of average ten percent.1 As such, it is not uncommon to find that many visually impaired students are still attending schools where the environment are not able to meet their needs. Students with visual impairments have difficulty in recognizing objects and 1The low number is due to insufficient specialist, lack of universal approaches for detection and the under-utilization of screening tools (Malaysia Education Blueprint 2013–2025, 2013). L. P. Im · K. Q. Sang (B) Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Kampar, Malaysia e-mail: qiansang1300@1utar.my © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021 A. M. M. Bin Meor Razali et al. (eds.), Advances in Civil Engineering Materials, Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering 139, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-6560-5_13 117 people, let alone to learn in normal classrooms. This study seeks to investigate how visually impaired persons use their senses to accurately comprehend their environ- ment and how building spaces can be improved to aid learning processes of the visually impaired persons. Literature Review According to the US National Library of Medicine, "Blindness is a lack of vision; referring to a loss of vision that cannot be corrected with glasses or contact lenses." There are two types of blindness. First is 'visually impaired', which is partial blind- ness where one has limited vision. Second is 'complete blindness' which means one cannot see anything and does not see light [1] Visual impairment can cause a decline in social and cognitive learning. This impairment can complicate learning ability and improvement of personal talents, resulted from the affected personal activities. Visual impairment makes it difficult in interpersonal relationships, for instance, in starting relationships, communications, or in understanding of others. Besides diffi- culties in comprehending the meaning of words, missing the messages, they can be perceived poorly in communication. When private needs of disabled persons are not provided, then improvement of the other abilities can be problematic. A study by Hazelwood school team concluded five themes or factors, which would help to create a healthy educational and living environment for the visually impair- ment students.2 These five factors include access to nature; kitchen and dining as primary social space; texture, colour and lighting to enhance sensory perception expe- rience; landmarks and shorelines to support circulation, movement and navigation; and social interaction and community involvement. Circulation and mobility are important as they define our existence in the world. The arrangement of a space should be dynamic, yet simple and clear. Consistency and repetition helps a person to orient and find ways. Other important component is colour, contrast and shadow. Research by the Alan Dunlop studio show colours of orange, red and yellow spectrum are the most recognizable for the visually impaired [2]. Specific selection of colour for different areas help students in way finding as well as orienting themselves in a space. Sound and space can also influence the living environment for visually impaired. Sound can also help in distinguishing open space from conventional classroom. Using different level of flooring to mark movement corridor from activity areas can produce change in sound, which can inform one whether he is standing on a movement corridor or an activity area [3]. Indeed, multi-sensory design is vital for the success of cognitive learning. It will stimulate the perception modalities, which in turn will have a positive effect on the visually impaired person's emotional state and learning process. According to [4] the tactile sense in human being is placed at the first place and it only needs 2Institute for Human Centred Design, Universal Design Case Studies—Hazel Wood School, retrieved from https://universaldesigncasestudies.org/education/primary/hazelwood-school. other senses to further develop the experience. Visual sense in human cannot exist independently whereas tactile sense can. Architecture with good sensorial features helps in recognizing building layout, contributing to navigation and rehabilitation process by expressing space through materiality. The innovative selection of materials based on tactile, acoustic and aromatic properties can translate the use, scale and privacy of a space. Materials can give tactile, aromatic and acoustic clues about the route and surrounding spaces, which aid the process of way finding. Method This study employs mainly in-depth interviews and third-party observation strategies. The interviews were conducted with the visually impaired students between the age group of 13–26 from the Malaysia Association for the Blind (MAB). MAB is a premier voluntary organization in Malaysia serving visually impaired persons. A third party observation was conducted at the premise of the MAB. It was carried out by observing how the visually impaired users carried out their daily practices and routines. This method aims to investigate the barriers in the learning environment and highlight examples of good practices in the cognitive learning processes. Findings and Discussions Use of Five Senses in Space Navigation For space navigation, the visually impaired persons preferred wide unobstructed spaces. No physical barrier such as furniture and decorations should be placed at the corridors. Other unwanted obstacles include open drains and sign posts. Furniture arranged in 'island' layout should be avoided to prevent 'tripping over'. Landmark is an important clue in navigation. Just as normal persons use visual landmarks, the blinds use 'non-visual landmarks' to identify a location. The tactile experience is important as the blinds rely heavily on it to gather information about objects around them in navigation. Floor coverings play a vital role, just as using a cane as an extension of the arm. As the students walked down the hallway to the cafeteria, they tapped their canes along the tiled floor. They heard the cane taps and counted the doors to know where they went. Most of the visually impaired interviewees preferred textured surface compared to flat surface. One participant, Siti3 (not her real name) said she did not have any specific preference on tactile experience but as long as the materials were different. 3Siti is 25 years old, her highest education is secondary school in Setapak Blindness Special Educa- tion Secondary School (SMPK) (SMK Pendidikan Khas Setapak (B). She lost her sight after an accident when she was 12 years old. To Pei Ling4 (not her real name), "Most of the building surface in Malaysia are similar, unlike those in United Kingdom". The placement of tactile blocks can be confusing, as some were not sure whether they should walk on it, or walk next to it as the blocks were not comfortable for walking. Carpet density is another important feature as it provides tactile clue to aid navigation. Other than the sense of touch, senses of familiarity and memory are as important in navigation. According to Divya (not her real name), "The biggest challenge was that you could walk by something and not know what it is." To orient in space, there is a need to know and remember where one is, to decide where and how one wishes to go. It is important that building elements provide a sense of empowerment to the users. For example, the blinds preferred manual doors compared to automatic doors as they allow independence in movement, which gives them better sense of control and confidence. In the absence of sight, sound is another key navigational tool. The blinds are consistently good at determining the exact origins of the sound. According to Fizal5 (not his real name), what helped him to orientate himself at the entrance of the building was to listen to sounds of people walking and the directions. He could tell "if something was blocking the way"; while to Ahmad,6 "I can estimate the volume of a space by listening to the reflective sound (echo)". Ali (not his real name) used reference points to tell where he was, and where he was going. He could tell an atrium from a hall or an enclosed room. "The sounds that could be incorporated into a building could be as direct as a tonal beep for a specific classroom or as subtle as the hum of florescent lights", Ali lamented. It should be emphasized that the visually impaired persons are not completely blind, so lights and color actually play a role in how the building is perceived. People with low vision can differentiate lights and colors. Ali7 (not his real name) mentioned that he could see glares from window openings and doors; he can orientate himself by following the lights. When using color in designs intended for the visually impaired, it is best to pair highly-contrast colors placed with one another, as it is the 'contrast between colors' and not the color itself, that makes a hue easy or hard to see. Classroom especially, must be designed in such a way to stimulate the use of other senses to comprehend the environment. On the connections of building elements such as ceiling height, lighting and acoustic levels, Hafiz (not his real name),8 referring to the conditions of the reflex- ology room, pointed out that "high ceiling emit loud echo sound, makes it hard for students to concentrate; the spot lights too, emits glare that disrupts comfort to those 4Pei Ling is a visually impaired English teacher in MAB. She has 10 years' experience as an English teacher and has been teaching in MAB for 4 years. 5Fizal had a visual impairment since birth. A few of his family members have the same condition. 6In primary school Ahmad 'had normal vision, more or less', but his sight deteriorated ever since, and he now only has vision in one eye and 'everything is basically fuzzy, silhouetted'. 7Ali lost his vision when he was 13 years old and he is currently taking his degree in Sport Management, University Malaya. 8Hafiz is 40 years old reflexology coach with normal vision. He has taught massage course in MAB for seven years. with low vision". Hence, it is essential to design the lighting in such a way as to minimize the glare. Teaching and Learning Environment Generally, teaching the visually impaired persons can be very challenging as there are many aspects to consider. According to Zhi Ying9 (not her real name), who was teaching piano at MAB, it could be difficult to explain certain concepts to students because they cannot see, while some have learning difficulties. One consideration was how to sustain their interests during lessons. Interactive methods such as games was used. "It's a fun challenge… My students taught me how to teach". Liyanna10 (not her real name) said that her teaching strategy was to start with least instruction, but subsequently turning to tactile or 'hand-on-hand' in her instructions. Although the visually impaired persons cannot see, their other senses are very sensitive". For Sumitha11 (not her real name), a 'multi-handicapped' teacher, one teaching strategy was to wear bright coloured clothing was a way to catch the attention of students, especially those with low vision. All interviewees preferred quiet environment to learn as they relied very much on hearing. They mentioned that if the classroom is surrounded by noisy environment, it will be difficult for them to focus. Other than quiet environment, almost all of the interviewees liked outdoor spaces such as gardens and trees. They found peace just by listening to water flowing sound from the garden. The basic tool used in teaching the blinds is the use of braille and tactile diagram. The challenge however, was the reproduction of braille. The participants commented that it was difficult to get extra teaching materials due to high printing cost for braille. This was a serious issue as the materials are essential learning tools. To Fizal, a solution for the lack of print materials was "Newsline," a news source run by National Federation of the Blind that can be accessed by telephone. Another solution was "KNFB Reader" app for the iPhone, which was used in taking pictures of the text and have it read back to the users. 9Zhi Ying is 38 years old and she is a piano teacher with ten years of experience. She has deep passion for music and has been teaching in MAB for five years. 10Liyanna has 'Norrie syndrome', which resulted in her being 'totally blind in her left eye, she has 25% vision in her right eye since birth. She can read size 18–24 font, and uses 'zoom' on her iPad and other devices to access text.. She has eight years of experience in teaching computer courses in MAB. 11Sumitha is 42 years old and she is a sighted muti-handicapped teacher. She has 22 years of experiences teaching multi-handicapped children. Conclusions In this research, we studied how the blinds and visually impaired used their senses to navigate and explore the learning environment. They rely on all senses especially the sense of tactile and hearing. Under normal circumstances, building qualities such as the use of openings to let in light, stimulative color pallets, and other architec- tural elements, are created for heightened visual enjoyment, but in designing for the visually impaired, these aesthetically appealing elements could work in the oppo- site. This research has provided insights as to how these blind and visually impaired navigate and their learning journey. The information can be useful to incorporate in building design to assist the visually impaired in learning and in experiencing the built environment. Acknowledgements The authors would like to express gratitude to students and staffs from the Malaysia Association for the Blind (MAB) and other individuals who were willing to be interviewed for this study. References Lusby FW (2018, August 28). MedlinePlus. Retrieved March 4, 2019, from Blindness and vision loss https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003040.htm Dunlop A (2016, September 30) Aasarchitecture. Retrieved from Hazelwood School Glasgow by Alan Dunlop Architect https://aasarchitecture.com/2016/09/hazelwood-school-glasgow-alan- dunlop-architect.html Herssens J (2011) Designing architecture for more Pallasmaa J (2005) The eyes of the skin: architecture and the senses. Wiley-Academy, Great Britain