第40 卷 第7 期 2021 年7 月 地理科学进展 Progress in Geography Vol.40, No.7 Jul. 2021 Research on the influence of the built environment around the rail station on the travel behavior of the disabled ——Taking 189 rail stations in Wuhan as an example Wang Anqi 1, 3 ，Peng Jiandong 1，Ren Peng 1，YangHong1* ，Dai Qi2 (1. School of Urban Design, Wuhan University，Wuhan 430070；2. Wuhan Institute of Transportation Development Strategy，Wuhan 430017； 3. Guangzhou Urban Planning Survey and Design Institute，Guangzhou 510060) Translated via Google Translate, July 10, 2023 Abstract: Themobilityofpersonswithdisabilitiesisanimportantaspecttomeasurethedevelopmentofsocialjustice. Dueto theirspecialphysicalandsocioeconomic conditions,thetravelbehaviorofpeoplewithdisabilitieshasmoreuniquecharacteristicsandismoreeasilyaffectedbythebuiltenvironment.Basedonthesmartcardswiping dataofrailtransitinWuhan,thispaperintegratesmulti-sourcespatialbigdata,exploresthespatio-temporalcharacteristicsofrailtransittravelfordisabledpeopleinWuhan,and usestheGeographicallyWeightedRegression(GWR)modeltofurtherexploretheimpactofthebuiltenvironmentaroundrailtransitstationsonrailtransitdisabledpeople. Spatialheterogeneityoffootfaleffects.Theresearchfoundthat: 29.7%ofthedisabledpeoplewhotravelbysubwayhavethecharacteristicsofcommuting,andthetravel frequencyishigheronworkingdaysthanonrestdays,andtheyalshowatrendofstaggeredtravelinthemorningandevening;Short-to-mediumdistancetravelisthemost, andthescopeofactivitiesisconcentratedinthemainurbanareawithinthethirdringroad,andthemostfrequenttravelactivitiesareinthesamedistrict,andthecross-river travelisless; In most research areas, the density of bus stops, road network density, large park density and station opening time all have a positive impact on the passenger flow of disabled people at the station; The daily average passenger flow of disabled people at transfer stations is significantly higher Different from previous research conclusions, the impact of land use mix and site barrier-free facilities on the passenger flow of disabled people at the site is not significant. The research can provide data support for the optimization of the built environment of "disabled-friendly" rail transit stations and the land use layout of new stations, and enhance the humanization of urban public services. Key words: rail station; built environment; people withdisabilities; travel behavior; geographically weighted regression; Wuhan City Improving the mobility of persons with disabilities is an important way to reduce poverty and discrimination and promote social integration of persons with disabilities [1]. Due to population aging and the rapid spread of chronic diseases, people with disabilities will become the largest vulnerable group in the world [2]. At present, there are about 85 million people with disabilities in China, accounting for 6.02% of the total population of the country. Therefore, it has become necessary for people with disabilities to participate in society and urban life on an equal footing. After the "Healthy China" strategy was put forward, more attention has been paid to the special travel needs of the disabled as a vulnerable group in transportation. Among the main modes of travel for the disabled, due to insufficient application and management standardization of mopeds, a large number of unlicensed vehicles are on the road, causing great safety hazards; conventional buses lack safety and stability, and drivers are not strong in service awareness, resulting in barrier-free Facilities "have but are not used", and even refuse to load. In contrast, rail transit has the advantages of being safe, secure, punctual, reliable, fast and comfortable, and is preferred by the disabled. Date received: 2020-10-12; Date revised: 2021-03-06. A mode of travel worth advocating. In order to protect the rail transit travel rights of the disabled, many cities in China have introduced preferential policies such as free rides for the disabled, but rail transit is still not the preferred mode of transportation for the disabled. The urban built environment is considered to be an important factor affecting the travel behavior of residents [3-5]. Studies have shown that due to special physical and socioeconomic conditions, the travel characteristics of disabled people are quite different from those of non-disabled people [6], and they are more susceptible to the impact of the built environment. The non-"disabled- friendly" urban built environment is one of the important reasons for the restricted travel of disabled groups [7-8]. In the field of public transportation, studies have found that the inefficiency of barrier-free facilities at public transportation stations deprives disabled people of their right to travel by public transportation [9]. Therefore, it is necessary to explore the unique characteristics of rail travel for the disabled, and provide more inclusive transportation services by optimizing the built environment around the site. Fund project: National Natural Science Foundation of China (71871027). [Foundation: National Natural Science Foundation of China, No. 71871027. ] About the first author: Wang Anqi (1995— ), female, from Chifeng, Inner Mongolia, master student, mainly engaged in urban transportation and land use research. E-mail: anqiwang27@whu.edu.cn *Brief introduction of corresponding author: Yang Hong (1993— ), male, from Panzhou, Guizhou, doctoral student, mainly engaged in the research of urban transportation and land use. E-mail: hyangup@whu.edu.cn 1127-1140 页 It is one of the important ways to improve the mobility of the disabled and promote social equity. At present, a large number of studies have clarified the correlation between the built environment and various travel behaviors [3,10-12]. For non-motorized travel behavior, land use mix, high density, street pattern [13], destination accessibility [3], public facilities service level [14] and proximity to bus stops [15] are factors that determine the level of walking. key built environment factors. For motorized travel behavior, factors such as density, land use diversity, accessibility, street connectivity, and distance from central business districts among built environment characteristics have a significant impact on car ownership [3,10,16]. Focusing on public transport travel behavior, a large number of studies have shown that the built environment around the site is closely related to the public transport travel rate [17- 20]. Among them, high population and employment density, mixed use of land, high level of street connectivity, and the improvement of public transportation facilities can largely promote residents' public transportation travel. The higher the population and employment density means the stronger the attractiveness of residence and employment, the shorter the potential commuting distance and the promotion of public transportation [21]. The higher the mixed degree of land use around the site, that is, the more balanced the distribution of various land uses, the more it can attract residents to carry out daily activities nearby, thereby reducing travel distance and the use of motor vehicles [22-24]. A high level of street connectivity (measured by road intersection density and road network density) means that traffic accessibility is better, and it is more convenient for people to obtain public transport services [18,22], which helps to improve residents' willingness to use public transport . The degree of perfection of public transport facilities involves the level of public transport services, and the research conclusions on this are different. Some studies have shown that when the number of bus lines around the site decreases, people are more inclined to take the subway [25]; some studies have also found that the more bus lines, the more convenient the connection between the bus and the subway, thereby increasing the subway passenger flow [26]. Other studies have found that the closer the station is to the central business district [27], the more entrances and exits of rail transit stations [28], and the transfer stations and terminal stations [29] can attract more passengers. The travel behavior of residents is affected by the built environment and presents different features of [30-31]. Discussing the travel characteristics of different types of people, especially special groups such as the disabled, has gradually attracted the attention of academic circles. The current research content on the travel characteristics of the disabled involves: travel needs [32], mode selection [32-33], safety and comfort [9], accessibility [7] and special travel services [34]. In terms of travel methods, foreign studies have shown that most visually impaired or mildly physically disabled people mainly travel on foot and wheelchairs[1], and for long-distance travel, 30% of disabled people choose public transportation to go to suburban parks for leisure activities[1] 35], many people with mental disabilities choose public transportation to go to work or school[36]; while in China, motorcycles are the preferred means of transportation for physically disabled people traveling alone. In terms of travel time, people with disabilities prefer to travel at off-peak times, and they are less likely to use the subway if they travel during peak hours. compared to its In other groups, the total activity time of the disabled is short, but most of the time is spent on the barrier-free facilities of the subway, which takes about 1 hour on average [37]. In terms of travel purposes, people with disabilities will generate more medical trips [6] and medical-seeking behavior is less affected by the degree of disability and age. In addition, studies have found that people with disabilities are more inclined to move around in areas they are familiar with [35], and usually choose forms of entertainment that do not require a large amount of capital investment, such as visiting relatives and friends, walking at home or in familiar places. In rare long-distance activities, people with disabilities without severe mobility impairments usually choose the city center for cultural and shopping activities, while those with mobility disabilities prefer to choose the suburbs of the city for outdoor activities. Due to the difficulty of travel, the non-commuting travel chain of the disabled is usually multi-purpose, so as to reduce the number of trips; while in the travel with commuting characteristics, the frequency of begging behavior is higher [1]. Throughout the relevant research at home and abroad, there are very few studies from the perspective of the disabled This paper explores the relationship between the built environment and the rail transit travel behavior of special populations. Therefore, based on the Wuhan subway card swiping data, this paper will study the special rail transit travel characteristics of the disabled and the built environment factors that affect the passenger flow of the disabled at the station, in order to build a "disabled-friendly" public transportation that encourages the disabled to travel. The system provides case reference. Data and methods Research Data The research data in this paper include the swiping data of "Wuhantong" subway smart card in Wuhan for a week in March 2019 (including working days and rest days), the distribution map of rail transit lines and stations in March 2019, the urban POI data in March 2019 and The land use data of Wuhan in 2015 (currently only the vector data of land use in 2015 can be obtained). As shown in Figure 1, there were 189 rail transit stations in Wuhan before March 2019, all of which were included in this study. Subway smart card data junction The structure is shown in Table 1. Each data record includes desensitized card number, check-in and check-out site, check-in and check-out line, check-in and check-out time, type of station in and out, and type of transaction card. The ticket checking system generates data based on the card swiping time and sequence, and each passenger trip will generate two data records for entering and exiting the station. According to the relevant regulations of Wuhan City, the "Wuhan Tong" disabled- blind card covers five types of disabilities: blind, lower limb disabled, severe hearing disabled, speech disabled, and impoverished mentally disabled. Holders of the disabled-blind card can ride Wuhan Metro for free. Filter the handicapped card data according to the card type, among which 36,871 pieces of card swiping data are generated on weekdays and 32,821 pieces on rest days. When 18436 and 16411 entries are generated on weekdays and holidays respectively OD travel records can support this study. 图1 武汉市轨道交通站点及线路分布 Fig.1 Distribution of Wuhan metro stations and routes 表1 武汉市地铁智能卡刷卡数据示例 Tab.1 Examples of data records of smart cards in Wuhan metro system Card number Credit card time Credit card line Swipe card site Swipe card type Card type 80271104xxxxxxxx 2019-03-11T06:20:51 4 454 28 1104 80271104xxxxxxxx 2019-03-11T06:46:22 4 444 29 1104 Note:Cardswipingline4isLine4;station454isYuanlinRoadStation,station444isWuchangRailwayStation;cardtype28isforinboundandcardtype29isforoutbound;cardtype1104isforthe handicappedandblind.. Definition of the area around the track station According to previous research, the area around a rail station is defined as a circular area formed by the walking distance that most people are willing to walk to a rail station. Usually, travelers have a certain tolerance limit for the time and distance of walking to the rail station, that is, the walking time-space threshold [11]. Liu Quan [38], Zhang Ning et al. [39] proposed that considering the individual differences in age and gender among walkers, the average walking scale in TOD areas should not exceed 10 minutes and walk 800 m. This value can be regarded as not including The largest scale generally adopted by cities under special circumstances. Due to the special physical conditions of the disabled, it is necessary to redefine the walkable scale around the track site suitable for the disabled. Referring to the indicators in the national standard "Code for the Design of Urban Roads and Buildings Convenient for the Disabled", the walking speed of the handicapped and visually handicapped is taken as 0.5 m/s, taking into account wheelchairs and other types of handicapped and normal adults The walking speed is equivalent, that is, 1.1~1.5 m/s, and the average travel speed of the disabled is determined to be 0.8 m/s. Therefore, the surrounding area of the rail transit station suitable for the disabled is determined as a 480 m buffer zone with the station as the center. Variable settings In 1997, Cervero et al. [21] first proposed to measure the built environment The "3D" (Density, Diversity, Design) factors, later some scholars included accessibility, distance to transit, and distance to city center into the built environment's impact on travel. Influencing factors of behavior [40]. On this basis, this paper refines the built environment around rail stations into four categories of indicators: land use mode, station accessibility, rail station characteristics, and public service facility layout for discussion. See Table 2 for specific indicator settings, calculations, and explanations. Research methods Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR) Model The regression models used in existing studies are divided into two categories: global regression and local regression. Global regression models are often used to study the factors affecting the first-level passenger flow of rail transit stations, such as least squares (OLS) [27], distance decay regression model [29], structural equation modeling (SEM) [41, etc. However, since the regression parameters are assumed to be stable in the global model, the calculated regression coefficients do not exhibit significant spatial differences. However, most of the actual spatial data have spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity, and it is difficult to meet the assumptions and requirements of methods such as OLS. In contrast, the GWR method embeds spatial structure into a regression model whose regression coefficients are a function of spatial location. Its plan 表2 多元回归模型指标设置 Tab.2 Variables of the multinomial regression model cation Classifi Land Index Distance from site to central business district Indicator Calculation and Interpretation — n use patterns Site accessibility Track site characteristics Layout of public service facilities Land use mix Density of bus stops Density of road network Number of intersections Does the opening time of the rail station belong to the transfer station? The number of entrances and exits of the station Barrier-free facilities and signage systems Number of medical institutions within the site Number of large parks around the site Number of cultural and leisure venues around the site Number of large shopping centers around the site Number of companies and enterprises around the site Land use mix entropy：S = - pi × lg pi i = 1 S is the entropy value of land use mixing degree; n is the division number of land use types; pi is the i-th class No Proportion of land area， pi = 1 i = 1 The ratio of the number of bus stops within the 480 m circle of the station to the total area of the area (number/m2) The ratio of the length of the road within the 480 m circle of the station to the total area of the area (m/m2) The intersection within the 480 m circle of the station Number of mouths (pieces) — Yes is recorded as 1; otherwise is recorded as 0 — Including: whether there is a ramp; whether the ramp is available; whether the barrier-free straight ladder is available; whether the blind path is continuous; whether there is a barrier-free indication system, etc. Yes is recorded as 1; otherwise is recorded as 0 — The calculation formula is as follows： p yi = βi0(ui, νi) + βik (ui, vi)xik + εi (i = 1, 2, …, n) (1) k = 1 In the formula：yi is the dependent variable；βi0(ui, νi) for the first i estimated intercept for sites；P is the number of independent variables ； xik is the kth independent variable of the ith site；βik (ui, vi) is the regression parameter of the independent variable xik； εi is the random error of the ith station. In this paper, the Gaussian function is used to calculate the spatial weighting matrix element wij ， The expression is w = exp [-(d /b)2] ( j = 1, 2, …, n) (2) Fig.2 Comparison of travel frequencies between people ij with disability cards and elderly cards ij In the formula：dij is the distance between the ith station and the jth station，b is the bandwidth. Results and analysis Behavior characteristics of rail transit trips for the disabled in Wuhan Travel frequency In this paper, the process of completing a trip from the origin to the destination is defined as a trip. According to the daily travel chain of disabled persons extracted from the card swiping data, the average subway trip per person for disabled people is 3.07 times/d on weekdays, and 2.82 times/d on rest days (including return trips, Figure 2). The travel frequency on weekdays is higher. Statistics from the card swiping data of the rail transit senior card in the same period: According to the analysis (limited by the traffic card classification standard in Wuhan, there may be a small overlap between the disabled and the elderly identified by the card type at present, but due to the strict restrictions on applying for a disability card, the number of overlapping groups will not be large, The impact can be neglected here), the elderly who are also traffic vulnerable groups take 2.51 subway trips per capita on weekdays/d, and 2.37 subway trips per capita on rest days/d (including return trips, Figure 2). Regardless of working days or rest days, the travel frequency of the disabled is slightly higher than that of the elderly. The reasons for this result may include the following two aspects: First, the disabled are familiar with the subway stations they often use, and the accessibility With relatively complete facilities and services, people with severe hearing disabilities, speech disabilities, and other mild disabilities covered by the Wuhan Pass Card for the Blind can use the subway as normal as healthy people Traveling, this group of people has increased the overall travel frequency; secondly, by comparing with the subway commuting data, it is found that 29.7% of the disabled people who use the subway travel have the characteristics of commuting behavior, and these individuals have increased the working day of the disabled. average number of trips. Travel time Departure time According to the statistics of the number of people with disabilities and commuters swiping their cards to enter the station at each time period, it can be seen that the departure time peaks for the disabled are concentrated at 7:00-9:00 and 17:00-18:00, and the urban commuting peaks at the same period are concentrated at 7:00-9:00 and 17:00-19:00 (Figure 3.4). The comparison found that the morning rush hour for the disabled is basically the same as the morning rush hour for urban commuting, However, there are differences in the distribution of the flow of people during peak hours. Compared with the commuting morning rush hour, which is more concentrated within one hour from 7:00 to 8:00, the number of people with disabilities departing during the peak hour from 7:00 to 9:00 is relatively balanced, and some disabled people can flexibly adjust their departure time. Avoid creating more concentrated congestion. In terms of evening return trips, the evening peak of the return trip for the disabled is concentrated at 17:00 Within one hour from 00 to 18:00, the duration is shorter than the evening rush hour of urban commuting. Moreover, the sunset time in Wuhan City in mid-March 2019 is around 18:30, which reflects that most disabled people choose to return before sunset and go out less at night. In addition, judging from the distribution of inbound traffic throughout the day, the traffic gap between the peak and trough hours of travel for the disabled is smaller, indicating that the travel time of the entire group is relatively scattered, indicating that 图3 残疾群体与通勤群体出行时刻对比 Fig.3 Comparison of departure times of persons with disabilities and urban commuters 图4 工作日、休息日残疾人出行时刻对比 Fig.4 Comparison of departure times of persons with disabilities on working days and holidays There is a certain trend of off-peak travel. Compared with working days, there is no obvious peak in travel time for disabled people on rest days, and the number of departures at each time period throughout the day is in a balanced state, and there is no obvious crowded period (Figure 4). The main reason for this feature may be that the disabled have less necessary commuting trips on rest days, while the travel time for other purposes is more free. In order to avoid congestion, travel time can be flexibly adjusted, so the concentration of departure time is reduced. Travel time To a certain extent, the duration of subway travel can reflect the scope of activities of the disabled. After analysis, 94.3% of the subway trips by disabled people take less than 1 hour or about 15- 30 min. The trips at stations 5-10 are the most concentrated, accounting for 37.7% of all trips. It is worth noting that trips longer than 2 hours are very rare, accounting for only 0.1%. From this, it can be inferred that the number of potential beggars and performers in subway stations has dropped significantly compared with the past. The reason may be that the "Wuhan City Rail Transit Operation Safety Management Measures" stipulates that performing arts, begging and other behaviors at stations are prohibited, and the implementation of the policy has been quite effective in recent years. Compared with working days, trips of less than 15 min and 15-30 min for disabled people on rest days decreased, which may be due to the reduction of some commuting trips; while trips of 45-60 min and more than 60 min increased, of which 45-60 min Min travel time increased the most, with an increase of 1.24% compared to weekdays. This shows that more people with disabilities choose to travel for a longer time on rest days, which may be related to the need to wait for their family members to accompany them on long- distance travel. But even with a slight increase in travel time, the 60-minute limit is still rarely broken (Figure 5). Travel distance direction On the whole, 74.62% of the travel distances of disabled people will not exceed 15 km, and the short- and medium- distance trips of 5-10 km (5-10 stations) are the main ones, accounting for about 30.62% of all trips; Distance travel is very small, accounting for only 3.12%. This part of the conclusion and travel time 图5 残疾人单次地铁出行平均时长及工作日、休息日出行时长对比 Fig.5 Average time of single metro trip and comparison of working and nonworking days for persons with disabilities The conclusions of this study (section 2.1.2) are consistent, indicating that the scope of activities of the disabled subway travel is relatively limited, and the daily route is relatively fixed. Compared with working days, short-distance trips of less than 5 km on rest days decreased by 1.34%, and long-distance trips of 15-30 km slightly increased (Figure 6). From the perspective of travel direction, the main subway travel directions of the disabled have little difference between working days and rest days. The same district travel activities in Hanyang District and Jianghan District are the most frequent, which confirms the conclusion that the disabled are more inclined to move within the range they are familiar with [35]. Cross-district travel is mainly concentrated between the six main city districts within the third ring road, including Jianghan District, Jiang'an District, Wuchang District, and Hanyang District, with obvious characteristics of activities in adjacent areas (Figure 7). The cross-district activities between Jianghan District and Jiang'an District are the most, and these two districts may provide more disabled-friendly working and living spaces. GWR-based analysis of factors affecting passenger flow of disabled people in rail transit Variable screening Taking the daily average passenger flow of disabled people at the site on weekdays and rest days as the dependent variable (Figure 8), the categorical variables and continuous variables in the index system in Section 1.3 were screened separately to obtain the optimal set of explanatory variables for geographically weighted regression analysis. Non-parametric test for categorical variables Since categorical variables will affect the accuracy of GWR analysis, the Mann-Whitney U test was performed separately on categorical variables such as transfer stations, barrier-free facilities, and indication systems. The results show that, among the scenarios represented by all categorical variables, there is only a significant difference in the number of disabled ridership at stations between "transfer stations" and "non-transfer stations". Table 3 shows the non-parametric test results for "transfer station attributes". Regardless of working days or rest days, the passenger flow of disabled people at transfer stations is significantly higher than that of "non-transfer stations". Therefore, paying attention to the optimization of the built environment of transfer stations will be of great significance to promote rail transit travel for disabled people. 图6 残疾人单次地铁出行平均距离及工作日、休息日出行距离对比 Fig.6 Average distance of single metro trip and comparison of working and nonworking days for persons with disabilities 图7 残疾人主要的地铁出行方向 Fig.7 Main directions of metro travel for persons with disabilities 图8 轨道站点日均残疾人客流量空间分布 Fig.8 Spatial distribution of daily average metro ridership of persons with disabilities 表3 "换乘站属性"非参数检验结果 Tab.3 Non-parametric test results of "transfer station" Model Transfe r station Lower quartile Median Upper quartile Z P -value Workday model Yes 164.000 291.000 448.000 -4.094 <0.001 No 47.500 118.000 196.000 Day off Yes 151.500 255.000 376.000 -3.837 <0.001 model No 47.750 119.500 203.250 Continuous variable stepwise linear regression Due to the existence of multicollinearity among continuous variables, stepwise linear regression was used to screen them. Table 4 and Table 5 show the variables with strong explanatory power to the dependent variable retained in the two models and the regression results. The stepwise regression results show that the density of bus stops, road network density, station opening time, and large park density are very important to the impact of disabled passenger flow at the station. The main difference between these variables in the weekday and rest day models is that the line opening time in the weekday model 表4 工作日模型中保留的显著变量及回归结果 Tab.4 Significant variables retained and stepwise regression results in the weekday model Standardized coefficient Variable β Standard error Standard coefficient t P-value Intercept -87.32324 37.96795 -2.29992 0.02263 Bus stop density 1.20421 0.47318 0.16052 2.54493 0.01179 Road network density 23188.39684 5353.62303 0.27061 4.33135 0.00002 Site opening time 0.01086 0.00498 0.11617 2.18081 0.03052 Density of large parks 表5 休息日模型中保留的显著变量及回归结果 1.87413 1.01713 0.09156 1.84257 0.06707 Tab.5 Signific ant variables retain ed and stepwise regression results in th e nonworking day model Standardized coefficient Variable Standard coefficient t P -value β Standard error Intercept -83.93798 40.66735 -2.06401 0.04048 Bus stop density 1.25756 0.50682 0.16398 2.48126 0.01403 Road network density 22990.70125 5734.24782 0.26246 4.00937 0.00009 Site opening time 0.01027 0.00533 0.10743 1.92484 0.05586 Density of large parks 2.89895 1.08944 0.13854 2.66095 0.00851 Significant in the model of rest days, but slightly less significant in the rest day model; the opposite is true for the density of large parks. The regression coefficients based on all significant variables are positive, indicating that in most areas of the study area, improving the quality of these built environment factors can effectively promote the probability of rail transit travel for disabled groups. Unlike the conclusions of the general population as the research object, the impact of land use mix on the disabled passenger flow of the site is not significant. This may be due to the fact that the direct effect of a high land use mix is to produce more diverse crowd activities, but such favorable conditions are difficult to generate enough attraction for the disabled to travel. On the one hand, the dense flow of people will increase the probability of danger for disabled people; on the other hand, excessive attention from the outside world will cause great psychological discomfort for disabled people, so travel for the purpose of enjoying services is unnecessary for disabled people. Similarly, the distance from the station to the central business district and public service facilities such as leisure and shopping also affect the non-essential travel of the disabled, so the significance is not strong. In addition, the barrier-free facilities of the site did not show a significant correlation, which may be due to the regulations of the corresponding regulations. The barrier-free hardware facilities of the city's rail stations have achieved full coverage. The number of site entrances and intersections has no obvious relationship with the number of disabled passengers at the site. The possible reason is that the accessibility requirements of the disabled people are more dependent on the special conditions of site entrances and road barrier-free facilities. It is less affected by changes in the number of entrances and exits and intersections Spatial heterogeneity of factors affecting disabled passenger flow at sites Taking the four optimal variables of bus station density, road network density, opening time, and large park density obtained through screening as explanatory variables, the regression model was constructed by using OLS and GWR methods respectively. Table 6 shows the comparison of the fitting results of the two methods. The GWR method can explain 67.85% and 64.93% of the variation of the dependent variables of the working day and rest day models respectively, and the adjusted coefficient of determination is about 20% better than that of the OLS method, and the simulation accuracy is significantly improved. Therefore, the GWR model is more suitable for this paper. For the convenience of comparison, Figure 9 spatially visualizes the impact of various built environment elements on the passenger flow of disabled people at the site. Since the distribution of rail transit stations covers the Second Ring Road of Wuhan City 表6 OLS 模型与GWR 模型拟合结果比较 Tab.6 Comparison of fitting results of OLS and GWR 日期 模型 残差平方和 决定系数 调整后的决定系数 AICc 工作日 OLS 2238546.4676 0.5748 0.5608 2323.7201 GWR 1245400.9563 0.7634 0.6785 2298.0343 休息日 OLS 2540259.0715 0.5383 0.5230 2347.6171 GWR 1419906.6779 0.7419 0.6493 2322.8186 图9 不同建成环境要素对站点残疾人客流量影响的空间变化 Fig.9 Spatial changes of the impact of built environment factors on metro ridership for persons with disabilities The built environment of each circle layer is quite different in the core urban area within the line, the peripheral urban area between the second and third ring roads, and the marginal urban area outside the third ring road. Each factor has a positive effect on the marginal passenger flow of the disabled at the site, and also has a partial impact. negative impact. The impact of bus stop density. The density of bus stops has a significant positive impact on the passenger flow of disabled people in rail transit stations as a whole, but it has a negative marginal effect on the stations in some areas. The spatial difference characteristics of the marginal effect of bus stop density on weekdays and rest days are basically the same. Most stations in the south and stations in Huangpi District and Xinzhou District are more sensitive to changes in bus station density than most other stations. Regardless of working days or rest days, in the three areas of Hanzheng Street (Qiaokou District), Hanyang Old City (Hanyang District), and Wuchang Old City (Hongshan District) distributed along the Yangtze River and Han River within the Third Ring Road, the impact of bus station density on rail transit The passenger flow of the disabled has a significant positive impact. These areas have a higher density of disabled population and more diversified travel modes. The high density of bus stops can make the connection and transfer with the subway more convenient. In addition, in Huangpi District, Xinzhou District and other rail transit stations covered Areas with low traffic rates and large distances between stations need to rely more on buses to complete connections before and after travel (Figure 9a, 9b). Therefore, considering the subway as a whole —The barrier-free connection of the bus connection system improves the convenience of transfer, which is more helpful to improve the subway travel of the disabled. Compared with working days, the density of bus stops has a greater positive impact on the passenger flow of disabled people on rest days, which is mainly reflected in some stations in the south of Jianghan District. Since Jianghan District is an area with serious traffic congestion in Wuhan, rest days With more private cars on the road, the subway can provide better service in terms of speed and reliability. In the east of Jiang'an District and north of Shahu Park in Wuchang District the density of bus stops has a negative impact on the passenger flow of disabled people in rail transit. There are many large- scale residential communities with a long history in these areas, and buses are the earliest means of public transportation. Therefore, people with disabilities are more willing to use buses to travel psychologically and habitually. The greater the density of bus stops, the more convenient it is for people to use buses to travel, but they are unwilling to spend more energy trying new means of transportation such as subways. The influence of road network density. On working days and rest days, the impact of road network density on the passenger flow of disabled people at the site has a high similarity, and it is mainly a positive marginal impact, and the degree of influence shows a spatial distribution trend that gradually weakens from the core urban area to the peripheral urban area ( Figure 9c, 9d). The stations where the road network density has a greater impact on the passenger flow of the disabled are mainly concentrated within the Second Ring Road, especially the stations in the south of Jiefang Avenue in Hankou and the south of Wuluo Road in Wuchang. The road network density in these areas is high, which means that the road connectivity is higher, especially in the south of Jiefang Avenue, an ideal road pattern of "dense road network and small blocks" has been formed. Higher road connectivity means more options for avoiding obstacles and higher site accessibility for people with disabilities. Outside of the Second Ring Road, the density of the road network also has a significant positive impact on the passenger flow of disabled people at some stations of Line 3 and Line 6 passing through Hanyang District. High road connectivity often means that the slow-moving environment is easier to realize. In the planning and design of the slow-moving environment, the barrier-free needs of the disabled should be considered in an important position. In addition, in marginal urban areas outside the Third Ring Road, such as Dongxihu District and the periphery of Hongshan District, the negative impact of road network density on the passenger flow of disabled people at stations is more obvious, which may be related to the low coverage of stations in these areas. The influence of the opening time of the site. The impact of station opening time on the passenger flow of the disabled is more significant on weekdays, which may be related to the individual travel behavior of the disabled on weekdays. The stations whose opening time has a significant impact on the passenger flow of the disabled are mainly located on the east bank of the Yangtze River on Line 2, Line 4, and Line 7 (Figure 9e). Most of these stations were opened after 2015. Under the constraints of barrier-free construction and management regulations in Wuhan, it is not only required that barrier-free facilities at rail transit stations be constructed according to uniform standards, but more emphasis is placed on providing thoughtful and humane customized accessibility services. At the same time, the newly-built site has larger space and more reasonable streamline design, which is more attractive to the disabled. In the area west of the Yangtze River, the opening time of the station has a more obvious negative impact on the passenger flow of disabled people at some stations. Most of these stations were opened before 2015. Under the social background at that time, the spatial design of the stations did not take into account the actual needs of the disabled. Therefore, even though these stations were opened earlier, they did not become a preferred travel mode for the disabled. The impact of the density of large parks. Density of large parks. The impact of disabled passenger flow is more significant on rest days, which may be related to the fact that disabled people travel with their families on rest days. Compared with smaller-scale street green spaces, large parks can provide sufficient space for activities and a wide view of the disabled, and to a certain extent can reduce the psychological pressure of the disabled due to excessive attention to the surrounding area, which is different from previous studies. The conclusion is consistent with [13]. The positive impact of the density of large parks on the flow of people with disabilities presents a trend of decreasing outward diffusion centered on both banks of the Yangtze River (Figure 9f). The sites with the most significant impact are the three major river beaches in Wuhan built along the banks of the Yangtze River, among which the Hankou River Beach is the largest riverside park in Asia. In addition, the Wuchang Yuemachang area gathers important large-scale park nodes in Wuhan, such as Yellow Crane Tower Park, Shouyi Park, and Ziyang Park. Therefore, the passenger flow of disabled people at surrounding sites also shows a strong positive relationship with the density of large parks. However, the positive relationship between the passenger flow of disabled people and the density of large parks at the site near the East Lake Greenway is slightly weaker. The possible reason is that the East Lake Greenway is located in the East Lake Scenic Area, and the large number of foreign tourists increases the inconvenience for the disabled. Sites with weak influence of the density of large parks on the flow of people with disabilities are mainly located in relatively remote areas such as Garden Expo Park and Jinyin Lake National Urban Wetland Park. They are more inclined to move around in areas they are familiar with. Traveling too long will greatly increase their psychological pressure and time cost. It can be seen that in the planning and design of large and medium-sized urban parks in the nature of non-fee scenic spots, in addition to the construction of barrier-free facilities, landscape and space design based on the psychological feelings of disabled people are also necessary considerations. Discussion and conclusion China has a huge population of people with disabilities, and travel difficulties have always been a major obstacle for disabled people to participate in society. In recent years, along with changesinsocialvalues such asequality andhuman rights, the fear of people with disabilities about transportation has eased, their willingness to go outoftheir homes andparticipate in society has increased, and the restricted travel needs of disabled groups have gradually been released. Existing in the field of urban transportation, with the introduction of new ideas and new values, traffic fairness is considered to be one of the important issues in the future development of urban transportation. It is an important manifestation of social equity to build a rail transit system that meets the travel needs of the disabled and to ensure that they enjoy basic public transport services. However, the current Chinese rail transit system's care for disabled groups is limited to the standardized construction of barrier-free facilities at stations, and has not fully considered the actual needs of disabled people's public transportation from the perspective of usability and ease of use, resulting in a certain disconnect between supply and demand. It is an important reason for the disabled to travel and be separated from society. The information provided by the subway smart card data makes it possible to extract the objective travel rules of the disabled, which largely avoids the deviation of data obtained through surveys and interviews in previous studies. This study is a preliminary attempt. Using the smart card swiping data of rail transit, it is found that the subway 29.7% of disabled people with disabilities have the characteristics of commuting travel. Overall, the travel frequency on working days is higher than that on rest days, and the travel frequency is slightly higher than that of the elderly who are also traffic disadvantaged groups. From the perspective of departure time, regardless of working days or rest days, disabled people tend to travel at off-peak times, and most disabled people choose to return before sunset, and go out less in the evening. From the perspective of travel time and distance, most of the subway travel time of the disabled is within 1 hour, and the short-to-medium distance travel of 15-30 minutes, that is, about 5-10 km, is the most concentrated. This shows that the scope of activities for the disabled to travel by subway is relatively limited, and the daily travel route is relatively fixed. There are very few trips longer than 2 hours, which shows that under the control of the policy, the phenomena of subway busking and begging for the disabled have been greatly reduced compared with before. Compared with working days, the long-distance travel on rest days for the disabled increased slightly, which may be related to the need to be accompanied by family members for long- distance travel. From the perspective of the main travel directions, the disabled travel more frequently in the main urban areas within the Third Ring Road, among which the travel activities in the same district within Hanyang District and Jianghan District are the most frequent, and they tend to have obvious characteristics of activities in familiar areas. It should be noted that the above conclusions are only the travel characteristics of rail transit for the disabled, and the travel characteristics of other modes for the disabled need to be further studied in combination with travel surveys. Based on the GWR model, this paper finds that there are significant differences in the degree of influence of the surrounding built environment of the stations located in different circles of the urban area of Wuhan on the passenger flow of people with disabilities at the stations. In most of the research areas, the density of bus stops, road network and large parks have a positive impact on the passenger flow of disabled Improving the quality of these built environment factors can effectively promote the disabled people to choose rail transit travel. The spatial difference characteristics of the marginal effects of bus stop density and road network density on weekdays and rest days are basically the same. The effect of line opening time is more significant on weekdays, while the effect of the density of large parks is more significant on rest days. In addition, disabled people at transfer stations Passenger flow is significantly higher than that of "non-transfer stations". Paying attention to the optimization of the built environment of transfer stations will be of great significance to promoterailtransittravelfor disabledpeople.Itisworthnotingthat the landuse mixhasno significant impacton the passenger flow of the disabled at the site. Itmaybe that the rich services andactivities broughtaboutbythehighlandusemixarenotenoughtoattractthe disabled to overcome many difficulties and produce unnecessary travel. Due to limited data acquisition, the cross-sectional data used in this papercanonly provide evidence forthecorrelation between variables, but cannot draw causality; the land use data and other data years are quite different, which may cause some deviations in the results; The research on barrier-free facilities pays more attention to the hardware facilities but not enough on the level of barrier-free services. These will be the direction of the next revision andin-depthresearch. Providing more equitable and inclusive transportation services is the future An important topic of urban transportation is also an important manifestation of the human nature of urban public services. In terms of transportation policy formulation, the research results of this paper can remind decision-makers to pay attention to the transportation accessibility of physiologically disadvantaged groups and ensure their fair enjoyment of basic transportation services; The optimization of the built environment of traffic stations and the land use layout of new stations provide data support and provide reference for promoting the refinement and human-oriented development of urban public services. 参考文献(References) Bombom L S, Abdullahi I. Travel patterns and challenges of physically disabled persons in Nigeria [J]. GeoJournal, 2016, 81(4): 519-533. Krahn G L. WHO world report on disability: A review [J]. Disability and Health Journal, 2011, 4(3): 141-142. Ewing R, Cervero R. Travel and the built environment [J]. Journal of the American Planning Association, 2010, 76 (3): 265-294. Wu L L, Wang W, Jing P, et al. Travel mode choice and their impacts on environment: A literature review based on bibliometric and content analysis, 2000-2018 [J]. Jour- nal of Cleaner Production, 2020, 249: 119391. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119391. 冯建喜, 杨振山. 南京市城市老年人出行行为的影响因素 [J]. 地理科学进展, 2015, 34(12): 1598- 1608. [Feng Jianxi, Yang Zhenshan. Factors influencing travel behav- ior of urban elderly people in Nanjing. Progress in Geog- raphy, 2015, 34(12): 1598-1608. ] Ermagun A, Hajivosough S, Samimi A, et al. A joint mod- el for trip purpose and escorting patterns of the disabled [J]. Travel Behaviour and Society, 2016, 3: 51-58. Alzouby A M, Nusair A A, Taha L M. GIS based multi cri- teria decision analysis for analyzing accessibility of the disabled in the greater Irbid municipality area, Irbid, Jor- dan [J]. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 2019, 58(2): 689- 698. Lucas K, Bates J, Moore J, et al. Modelling the relation- ship between travel behaviours and social disadvantage [J]. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 2016, 85: 157-173. Soltani S H K, Sham M, Awang M, et al. Accessibility for disabled in public transportation terminal [J]. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2012, 35: 89-96. Ding C, Cao X Y. How does the built environment at resi- dential and work locations affect car ownership? An ap- plication of cross-classified multilevel model [J]. Journal of Transport Geography, 2019, 75: 37-45. 申犁帆, 王烨, 张纯, 等. 轨道站点合理步行可达范围建成环境与轨道通勤的关系研究: 以北京市44 个轨道站点为例 [J]. 地理学报, 2018, 73(12): 2423- 2439. [Shen Lifan, Wang Ye, Zhang Chun, et al. Relationship be- tween built environment of rational pedestrian catchment areas and URT commuting ridership: Evidence from 44 URT stations in Beijing. Acta Geographica Sinica, 2018, 73(12): 2423-2439. ] 塔娜, 柴彦威, 关美宝. 建成环境对北京市郊区居民工作日汽车出行的影响 [J]. 地理学报, 2015, 70(10): 1675-1685. [Ta Na, Chai Yanwei, Kwan Mei-po. The re- lationship between the built environment and car travel distance on weekdays in Beijing. Acta Geographica Sini- ca, 2015, 70(10): 1675-1685. ] Schreuer N, Plaut P, Golan L, et al. The relations be- tween walkable neighbourhoods and active participation in daily activities of people with disabilities [J]. Journal of Transport & Health, 2019, 15: 100630. doi:10.1016/j. jth.2019.100630. 鲁斐栋, 谭少华. 城市住区适宜步行的物质空间形态要素研究: 基于重庆市南岸区16 个住区的实证 [J]. 规划师, 2019, 35(7): 69- 76. [Lu Feidong, Tan Shaohua. Ur- ban form characteristics for walkable neighborhood: A case study of 16 neighborhoods in Nan'an District, Chongqing. Planners, 2019, 35(7): 69-76. ] Lamour Q, Morelli A M, Marins K R D C. Improving walkability in a TOD context: Spatial strategies that en- hance walking in the Belém neighbourhood, in São Pau- lo, Brazil [J]. Case Studies on Transport Policy, 2019, 7 (2): 280-292. Jiang Y, Gu P Q, Chen Y L, et al. Influence of land use and street characteristics on car ownership and use: Evi- dence from Jinan, China [J]. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2017, 52: 518-534. Park K, Ewing R, Scheer B C, et al. The impacts of built environment characteristics of rail station areas on house- hold travel behavior [J]. Cities, 2018, 74: 277-283. Ding C, Cao X Y, Liu C. How does the station-area built environment influence metrorail ridership? Using gradi- ent boosting decision trees to identify non- linear thresh- olds [J]. Journal of Transport Geography, 2019, 77: 70- 78. 黄洁, 王姣娥, 靳海涛, 等. 北京市地铁客流的时空分布格局及特征: 基于智能交通卡数据 [J]. 地理科学进展, 2018, 37(3): 397- 406. [Huang Jie, Wang Jiao'e, Jin Haitao, et al. Investigating spatiotemporal patterns of pas- senger flows in the Beijing metro system from smart card data. Progress in Geography, 2018, 37(3): 397- 406. ] 潘海啸, 张超. 大型超市购物出行与TOD 规划策略: 以上海近郊轨道交通站点地区为例 [J]. 城市发展研究, 2018, 25(4): 54-61. [Pan Haixiao, Zhang Chao. Shopping mall travel and transit: Oriented development in suburban area. Urban Development Studies, 2018, 25(4): 54-61. ] Cervero R, Kockelman K. Travel demand and the 3Ds: Density, diversity, and design [J]. Transportation Re- search Part D: Transport and Environment, 1997, 2(3): 199-219. Jun M J, Choi K, Jeong J E, et al. Land use characteris- tics of subway catchment areas and their influence on subway ridership in Seoul [J]. Journal of Transport Geog- raphy, 2015, 48: 30-40. Yang Y, Xu Y Q, Rodriguez D A, et al. Active travel, pub- lic transportation use, and daily transport among older adults: The association of built environment [J]. Journal of Transport & Health, 2018, 9: 288-298. Chen F A, Wu J R, Chen X H, et al. Vehicle kilometers traveled reduction impacts of transit- oriented develop- ment: Evidence from Shanghai City [J]. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2017, 55: 227-245. Chen E H, Ye Z R, Wang C, et al. Discovering the spatio- temporal impacts of built environment on metro rider- ship using smart card data [J]. Cities, 2019, 95: 102359. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2019.05.028. 赵鹏军, 李南慧, 李圣晓. TOD 建成环境特征对居民活 动与出行影响: 以北京为例 [J]. 城市发展研究, 2016, 23(6): 45- 51. [Zhao Pengjun, Li Nanhui, Li Shengxiao. The impacts of the built environment on residents' acitivi- ties and travel behavior in TOD areas: A case study of Beijing. Urban Development Studies. 2016, 23(6): 45- 51. ] Zhao J B, Deng W, Song Y, et al. Analysis of metro rider- ship at station level and station- to- station level in Nan- jing: An approach based on direct demand models [J]. Transportation, 2014, 41(1): 133-155. Sung H, Choi K, Lee S, et al. Exploring the impacts of land use by service coverage and station-level accessibili- ty on rail transit ridership [J]. Journal of Transport Geog- raphy, 2014, 36: 134-140. Gutiérrez J, Cardozo O D, García-Palomares J C. Transit ridership forecasting at station level: An approach based on distance- decay weighted regression [J]. Journal of Transport Geography, 2011, 19(6): 1081-1092. 石天戈, 张小雷, 杜宏茹, 等. 乌鲁木齐市居民出行行为 的空间特征和碳排放分析 [J]. 地理科学进展, 2013, 32 (6): 897-905. [Shi Tiange, Zhang Xiaolei, Du Hongru, et al. Spatial characteristics of residents' outings and carbon emissions in Urumqi City. Progress in Geography, 2013, 32(6): 897-905. ] 韩会然, 焦华富, 王荣荣, 等. 城市居民购物消费行为研究进展与展望 [J]. 地理科学进展, 2011, 30(8): 1006- 1013. [Han Huiran, Jiao Huafu, Wang Rongrong, et al. Progress and prospects of the research on shopping be- havior of urban residents. Progress in Geography, 2011, 30(8): 1006-1013. ] Schmöcker J D, Quddus M A, Noland R B, et al. Mode choice of older and disabled people: A case study of shopping trips in London [J]. Journal of Transport Geog- raphy, 2008, 16(4): 257-267. Var T, Yeşiltaş M, Yaylı A, et al. A study on the travel pat- terns of physically disabled people [J]. Asia Pacific Jour- nal of Tourism Research, 2011, 16(6): 599-618. Bearse P, Gurmu S, Rapaport C, et al. Paratransit demand of disabled people [J]. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 2004, 38(9): 809-831. Taylor Z, Józefowicz I. Intra-urban daily mobility of dis- abled people for recreational and leisure purposes [J]. Journal of Transport Geography, 2012, 24: 155-172. Nakamura F, Ooie K. A study on mobility improvement for intellectually disabled student commuters [J]. IATSS Research, 2017, 41(2): 74-81. Prasertsubpakij D, Nitivattananon V. Evaluating accessi- bility to bangkok metro systems using multi-dimensional criteria across user groups [J]. IATSS Research, 2012, 36 (1): 56-65. 刘泉. 轨道交通TOD 地区的步行尺度 [J]. 城市规划, 2019, 43(3): 88-95. [Liu Quan. Walking scale of TOD ar- ea along rail transit line. City Planning Review, 2019, 43 (3): 88-95. ] 张宁, 戴洁, 张晓军. 基于多项Logit 模型的轨道交通站点步行接驳范围 [J]. 城市轨道交通研究, 2012, 15(5): 46-49. [Zhang Ning, Dai Jie, Zhang Xiaojun. Walking af- fect area of rail transit station based on multinomial logit model. Urban Mass Transit, 2012, 15(5): 46-49. ] 曹新宇. 社区建成环境和交通行为研究回顾与展望: 以美国为鉴 [J]. 国际城市规划, 2015, 30(4): 46-52. [Cao Xinyu. Examining the relationship between neighbor- hood built environment and travel behavior: A review from the USA perspective. Urban Planning International, 2015, 30(4): 46-52. ] Sohn K, Shim H. Factors generating boardings at metro stations in the seoul metropolitan area [J]. Cities, 2010, 27(5): 358-368. Impact of the built environment of rail transit stations on the travel behavior of persons with disabilities: Taking 189 rail transit stations in Wuhan City as an example WANG Anqi1,3, PENG Jiandong1, REN Peng1, YANG Hong1*, DAI Qi2 (1. School of Urban Design, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430070, China; Wuhan Transportation Development Strategy Research Institute, Wuhan 430017, China; Guangzhou Urban Planning and Design Survey Research Institute, Guangzhou 510060, China) Abstract: Mobility of persons with disabilities is an important aspect of equality of societies. Due to their special physical and socioeconomic conditions, the travel behavior of persons with disabilities has unique characteristics and is more susceptible to the impact of the built environment. Based on the smart card data of Wuhan rail transit, this study explored the spatial and temporal characteristics of rail transit trips of persons with disabilities in Wuhan City, and further explored the spatial heterogeneity of the impact of the built environment around rail transit stations on the passenger flow of persons with disabilities by using the geographically weighted regression (GWR) model. The findings are as follows: 1) 29.7% of the persons with disabilities who travel by subway show the characteristics of commuting, the frequency of travel on working days is higher than that on nonworking days, and they all show the trend of off- peak travel in the mornings and evenings. 2) Traveling is mostly within the short and medium distance of 15- 30 minutes, and the range of activities is concentrated in the main city within the Third Ring Road, with the most frequent trips in the same area and few trips across the river. 3) In most research areas, bus stop density, road density, and large park density and opening time all have positive influence on the ridership of persons with disabilities. 4) The daily average ridership of persons with disabilities in transfer stations is significantly higher than that in non-transfer stations. 5) Different from the conclusions of previous studies, the mixed degree of land use and barrier- free facilities have no significant influence on the ridership of persons with disabilities. The result of this research can provide data support for the optimization of the built environment of disability- friendly subway stations and the land use of new stations, and enhance the people-oriented development of urban public services. Keywords: rail transit stations; built environment; persons with disabilities; travel behavior; geographically weighted regression; Wuhan City