International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hihc20 Design of Navigation Applications for People with Disabilities: A Review of Literature and Guideline Formulation Maryam Zahabi, Xi Zheng, Azima Maredia & Farzaneh Shahini To cite this article: Maryam Zahabi, Xi Zheng, Azima Maredia & Farzaneh Shahini (2022): Design of Navigation Applications for People with Disabilities: A Review of Literature and Guideline Formulation, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2022.2088883 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2088883 Published online: 04 Jul 2022. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 76 View related articles View Crossmark data Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2088883 Design of Navigation Applications for People with Disabilities: A Review of Literature and Guideline Formulation Maryam Zahabi, Xi Zheng, Azima Maredia, and Farzaneh Shahini Wm Michael Barnes '64 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA Introduction In 2020, over 1 billion people in the world lived with some form of disability and this number is increasing. It is expected that most people will experience a temporary or permanent disability at some point in their lives (WHO, 2020). In the U.S., 61 million adults have some type of dis- ability, which accounts for about a quarter of the country's population (CDC, 2020). Out of these individuals, 4.6% have vision impairments, 5.9% have hearing impairments, 13.7% have mobility impairments, 10.8% have cognitive impair- ments, and 40% are older adults with disabilities (CDC, 2020). Wayfinding can be a challenging task for individuals with disabilities. In unfamiliar areas, visually impaired users may have difficulties finding bus stops, benches, and shelters (Hara et al., 2015). Also, they do not always have access to public transportation and rideshares and have difficulty trusting the driver to drop them off at the correct location (Brewer & Kameswaran, 2019). Individuals with cognitive disabilities have difficulty in both orientation and navigation due to their reduced cognitive capability (Gomez et al., 2015). Some may not be able to distinguish the left and right directions and feel confused about matching the land- mark pictures with the actual buildings (Garc'ıa de Marina et al., 2012). Thus, they require accompany and supervision of family members or caregivers (Mengue-Topio et al., 2011; Stock et al., 2011). While wheelchair users have used naviga- tions systems to explore outside, finding accessible routes that are totally barrier-free to the wheelchair is still challenging (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016; Pr'emont et al., 2020). Additionally, older adults may experience difficulties with some mobile maps because of the inadequate visual saliency, ambiguous affordances, and insufficient amount of information in their design (Yu & Chattopadhyay, 2020). There has been a limited number of studies clearly defin- ing the wayfinding needs of people with disabilities (Gupta et al., 2020). While there are some studies on navigation for the visually impaired people, there are very few studies for those with mobility or hearing impairment (Ding et al., 2007; Hara et al., 2015; Karimi et al., 2013; Kasemsuppakorn et al., 2015; Menkens et al., 2011). Indoor navigation apps are even more scarce due to situational and technical limita- tions, such as navigating through stairs and crowded places (Williams et al., 2013). Based on the CDC analyzed data from the family component of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) for the years 2011–2014, 22.6 mil- lion (11.9%) working-age adults (aged 18–64 years) were found to have any disability, and in this population, 9.8 mil- lion (about 43%) had more than one disability type (Stevens et al., 2016). However, there is a lack of design guidelines for navigation apps geared towards people with different types of disabilities (Nielsen, 1996). The objective of this study was to provide guidelines for designing navigation apps that are helpful for people with disabilities. To achieve this objective, we conducted a systematic review of the lit- erature and a scoping view of commercially available assist- ive apps to understand users' main needs and requirements for such navigation systems. CONTACT Maryam Zahabi mzahabi@tamu.edu Wm Michael Barnes '64 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, Emerging Technologies Building, College Station, TX 77843-3131, USA © 2022 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 2 M. ZAHABI ET AL. There has been a number of literature review studies on navigation devices for people with visual impairment. For example, Kuriakose et al. (2020) conducted a systematic review of literature on tools and technologies for blind and visually impaired individuals. The study was focused on both indoor and outdoor navigation tools and reviewed the underlying technology for those navigation devices in five main categories of visual imagery systems, non-visual sys- tems, map-based systems, systems with 3D sound, and smartphone-based solutions. In addition, the search period was limited to five years (2015–2020). The findings on smartphone-based solutions provided an overview of how these systems work but did not provide any information regarding their interface design features. The recommenda- tions provided by Kuriakose et al. (2020) were general guidelines focusing on the technology and not the interface. This study is different from Kuriakose et al.'s review in scope and coverage of studies, findings, and provided rec- ommendations. Budrionis et al. (2020) conducted another review study on smartphone-based travelling aids for visu- ally impaired individuals. They used both a systematic review methodology and a semi-structured online survey with expert users. Budrionis et al.'s study was focused on purpose and functionality of smartphone-based navigation devices, input/output types, data processing and perform- ance, and usability evaluation methods used in prior studies. One of the gaps identified in Budrionis et al.'s study was the lack of evaluations on existing off-the-shelf navigation solu- tions. This gap has been addressed in this study by conduct- ing a scoping review and content analysis on commertially available mobile applications. Another literature review study (Khan et al., 2021) provided an overview of different navigation approaches (e.g., e-cane, laser-based walker) and hardware components for obstacle avoidance, and identified some performance metrics for evaluation of these devices (e.g., walking speed, accuracy). Similar to Kuriakose et al. (2020), Khan et al.'s study provided general guidelines on different navigation technologies and not their interfaces. Finally, in a recent review, Al-Razgan et al. (2021) focused on usability of mobile applications for people with visual impairment. Although navigation applications were men- tioned in Al-Razgan et al.'s study, the reviewed studies were limited to five years (2015–2020) and the guidelines were general recommendations including eliminating busy graph- ical interfaces and relying on sounds, use of machine learn- ing approaches to accurately identify the surroundings, and providing real-time updates regarding the upcom- ing obstacles. This study is focused on providing guidelines for design- ing navigation apps that are helpful for people with different types of disabilities. In addition to a systematic review of the literature, we conducted a scoping view and content analysis of commercially available mobile applications to gain insights from the practical application perspective. Furthermore, as compared to prior literature review studies that limited their search to approximately five years without any justification (Al-Razgan et al., 2021; Budrionis et al., 2020; Kuriakose et al., 2020), this study covered a wider range and searched relevant studies published since 2008, when mobile applications gradually became known and popular to the wider public (Strain, 2015). This article is structured in the following way. In section 2, we introduce the search strategy and inclusion criteria to find relevant studies and apps. Section 3 provides a detailed summary of the review findings. In Section 4, we present the design guidelines that can be used to develop navigation systems for people with disabilities. We also demonstrate how to implement the guidelines in designing the apps. In Section 5, we discuss the conclusions and future work. Approach To identify the gaps in current assistive navigation applica- tion design, we conducted a systematic literature review of relevant scientific papers and a scoping review of commer- cially available mobile applications. The search included the studies that aimed at finding solutions to improve the inter- face design and accessibility of navigation applications for people with different types of disabilities. We also reviewed relevant apps to gain insights from the practical application perspective. In our previous work (Zheng et al., 2021), we have conducted a scoping review and content analysis of navigation apps on iOS for blind and visually impaired users. Twenty-eight features were summarized from the ana- lysis of 14 relevant apps and we proposed a set of design recommendations for people with visual impairments based on the analysis. In this work, we expand the search range to apps that are specifically designed for people with other types of disabilities including hearing, mobility, and cogni- tive impairment, and older adults with disabilities. Systematic literature review of scientific studies The literature review was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (Moher et al., 2009). The detailed description of our method including search strategy, eligibility and selection criteria, and data analysis is described below. Search strategy The literature search was conducted using databases for sci- ence and engineering including Compendex, Web of Science (WOS), ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Wiley Online, Science Direct, SpringerLink, and Taylor & Francis. Compendex, Science Direct, and IEEE Xplore were used as the most common engineering and technology related data- bases. Wiley Online and WOS databases were used to search for results across multiple disciplines. ACM digital library database was used as another source due to its coverage of human-computer interaction studies and mobile technolo- gies. Manual search was also conducted in Google Scholar, as it is the most comprehensive search engine and to avoid missing any relevant studies that might not have appeared in the searched databases. Boolean logic (AND, OR) was INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 3 Table 1. A list of search terminologies. Category Visual Hearing Mobility Cognitive Older adults Search terminology Visual impairment Hearing impairment Mobility impairment Cognitive disability Older adult Visually impairment Hearing impaired Mobility impaired Cognitive impairment Older people Visually impaired Hearing loss Physical impairment Intellectual disability Elderly Visually disabled Deaf hard of Physical disability Memory loss Senior people low vision hearing motor impairment older users Blind Wheelchair user Blindness Table 2. Literature search results. Category Visual impairment Hearing impairment Mobility impairment Cognitive impairment Older adults Database Initial Refined Initial Refined Initial Refined Initial Refined Initial Refined Web of Science 295 6 18 0 255 3 45 3 73 1 Compendex 591 5 45 0 594 2 86 4 124 4 ACM Digital Library 2080 17 266 0 155 2 149 3 363 1 IEEE Xplore 504 6 26 0 331 0 31 3 79 0 Wiley Online 413 2 112 0 50 0 112 0 272 0 Science Direct 945 4 180 0 233 1 262 0 768 1 SpringerLink 6701 3 8 0 1580 1 1619 1 4939 0 Taylor & Francis 312 4 80 0 61 3 71 1 248 0 used to combine the keywords of navigation and user inter- face, with each of the "terminologies" listed in Table 1. For example, for visual impairment, the search string included: (navigation) AND (user interface) AND (visual impairment OR visually impairment OR visually impaired OR visually disabled OR low vision OR blind OR blindness). The search was focused on finding relevant studies published since 2008, when mobile applications gradually became known and popular to the wider public (Strain, 2015). Inclusion and exclusion criteria The inclusion criteria used in this study were: (1) articles written in English and published in peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and books, and (2) studies that focused on designing or providing guidance to make the mobile interfaces user-friendly and accessible to people with disabilities. Note that we have excluded papers that focused on the technology rather than the design since the aim of this study was to formulate a set of design guidelines that can improve the interfaces for navigation applications. Search results The literature search was completed by May, 2022. In the initial search, 25,076 articles were identified to potentially be relevant to the study based on the set of keywords. After reviewing the titles and abstracts, the full text of the papers that were identified to be relevant were reviewed by the authors independently. Table 2 shows the detailed search results of the initial numbers of articles found in each data- base for each type of disability and the number of articles identified to be relevant to the current work after the full review. After removing the duplicated studies among the databases, 65 unique studies were found to meet the inclu- sion criteria and were included in this review. The detailed findings and conclusions of the 65 relevant articles are dis- cussed in Section 3.1. A Scoping review and content analysis of commercially available mobile applications Two types of mobile apps were reviewed including: (1) navi- gation apps that are specifically designed for people with hearing impairment, mobility impairment, cognitive impair- ment, or older adults; and (2) apps designed for individuals with disabilities in areas other than navigation. Note that navigation apps for blind or visually impaired people have been excluded in this review since they have been provided in detail in our previous study (Zheng et al., 2021). However, we included those apps that targeted users with multiple dis- abilities (e.g., hearing impairmed and visually impaired users). We included a review on apps designed for individuals with disabilities in other domains to capture general usability prin- ciples and design requirements that might be applicable to the design of navigation apps for this population. Search of assistive navigation apps The terminologies used to find navigation apps that can assist people with disabilities are listed in Table 3. The key- words included navigation, guide, and wayfinding in com- bination with the associated terms that describe the specific types of disability. All searches were conducted in the Apple iOS app store and Googly play store and were completed in May 2022. In total, 180 apps were identified from the initial search. After removing the duplicated apps and apps with- out accessibility (need to be purchased or need to be used at a precise location), 161 unique apps were selected for further review on titles and app descriptions. Based on the screening of titles and descriptions, we excluded those apps that were not written in English, and were not relevant in assisting older adults or people with cognitive, hearing, or mobility impairments to fulfill the wayfinding task. Fifty-two apps were downloaded to interact with for further assessment. In the end, we found 15 navigation apps for people with mobil- ity impairment and one navigation app for older adults. 4 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Table 3. Navigation apps search: Search terminologies and results. Search terminology Initial Screened Refined navigation þ hearing impairment guide þ hearing impairment wayfinding þ hearing impairment navigation þ hearing loss guide þ hearing loss wayfinding þ hearing loss navigation þ deaf guide þ deaf wayfinding þ deaf navigation þ hard of hearing guide þ hard of hearing wayfinding þ hard of hearing navigation þ mobility impairment guide þ mobility impairment wayfinding þ mobility impairment navigation þ motor impairment guide þ motor impairment wayfinding þ motor impairment navigation þ wheelchair guide þ wheelchair wayfinding þ wheelchair navigation þ cognitive impairment guide þ cognitive impairment wayfinding þ cognitive impairment navigation þ cognitive disability guide þ cognitive disability wayfinding þ cognitive disability navigation þ older adult guide þ older adult wayfinding þ older adult navigation þ older people guide þ older people wayfinding þ older people navigation þ elderly guide þ elderly wayfinding þ elderly 48 18 0 89 17 15 22 9 0 21 8 1 Table 4. Mobile apps for other applications: Searched terminologies and results. Category Terminology Initial Refined Hearing impairment Hearing impairment 580 25 Hearing loss Deaf Cognitive impairment Cognitive impairment 176 1 Cognitive disability Older adult Older adult 215 6 Older people Elderly However, we did not find any navigation apps that could provide instant support to people with cognitive impair- ments or hearing impairment. Search of apps designed for disabled or older adults Since there was no or very few navigation apps specifically designed for older adults or people with cognitive or hearing impairment, we extended our search and analysis with apps that support these users for other daily activities or commu- nication. The search keywords and results are listed in Table 4. All searches were completed in May, 2022. The initial search led to 971 apps, which was then filtered based on the criteria of availability, English version, relevancy, date (have been updated within three years), and duplication. Finally, 32 additional apps were found to be relevant. However, three apps targeted people with multiple disabilities (i.e., MAVIS, Accessible Jordan, and BillionAbles). Therefore, 45 unique apps (including the navigation apps presented in Table 3) were included to conduct the content analysis (described in Section 2.2.3). Qualitative content analysis To understand the design insights and features of the selected assistive apps, we conducted a qualitative content analysis including the following four phases: Coding the basic descriptive information for each app, including the app name, developer, version, latest updated date, rating, number of reviews, supporting languages, target user groups, and application; Interpreting the written descriptions, screenshot demos, available user reviews of apps, and the version updating reports provided by the developers; Developing a preliminary framework to organize a list of design features; and Revising and grouping the identified features based on the interaction with apps. Results Summary of literature review findings The characteristics of the reviewed studies are summarized in Table 5 with a focus on the target user group, modality of information presentation, methods, and applications. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 5 Table 5. Summary of relevant studies on assistive navigation application design and development. No. References User group Modality Methods Application Rodriguez-Sanchez et al. (2014) Blind or visually impaired users Visual (text, map), auditory and tactile feedback, touchscreen Literature review; User testing Outdoor navigation Gallagher et al. (2014) Blind or visually impaired users Visual (text, arrow), tactile feedback in default, audio feedback when requested Als et al. (2018) Blind or visually impaired users Audio, visual (text, icon, unique color scheme, map), and vibration feedback Review of indoor navigation research products for blind and visually impaired users; Usability evaluation Survey and questionnaires; user testing Indoor navigation Outdoor navigation Giudice et al. (2019) Blind or visually impaired users Visual, spatialized audio, and haptic or vibration cues; speech input enabled User testing Indoor navigation Nair et al. (2020) Blind or visually impaired users Audio, visual, and vibrotactile feedback with different levels (e.g., information density and vibration intensity) Usability evaluation; Performance study Indoor navigation Harriehausen- Mu€hlbauer (2016) Mobility impaired users Visual, audio feedback; speech input, keyboard input User testing Indoor and outdoor navigation Pr'emont et al. (2020) Mobility impaired users Not applicable Scoping review Outdoor navigation Liu et al. (2008) Cognitive impaired users Visual (arrow, photo of landmarks, photo with highlight area, text message), audio message Wizard-of-Oz; usability evaluation Indoor navigation Liu et al. (2009) Cognitive impaired users Visual (arrow, photo of landmarks, photo with highlight area, text message), audio message User testing Outdoor navigation Gomez et al. (2015) Cognitive impaired users Visual (arrow, street-level photos, text), audio, vibrate feedback User-centered design; User testing; Comparison analysis with another commercial navigation app Outdoor navigation Gomez and Montoro (2015) Cognitive impaired users Visual (arrow, street-level photos, text) Literature review; usability evaluation Outdoor navigation Jian et al. (2012) Older adults Visual, audio feedback; touch and speech input User testing Indoor navigation Sili et al. (2017) Older adults, blind or visually impaired users Visual, tactile, and voice feedback; touchable input User-centered design; interview with caregivers and facility staff members; user experience evaluation Indoor and outdoor navigation Comai et al. (2017) Older adults, cognitive impaired users, mobility impaired users Visual (text, image, arrow, map) and audio feedback; touchable input User testing Indoor navigation Fickas et al. (2008) Cognitively impaired users Bird view and point of view images, audio directions without image, text-based instructions without image Chang et al. (2010) Cognitively impaired users Images overlaid with arrows and text-based information Stent et al. (2010) Visually impaired (low vision) users Speech-based input; audio, text, and tactile output User/field testing Outdoor navigation User/field testing Indoor navigation Concept paper Outdoor navigation Kacorri et al. (2018) Visually impaired users Speech and text Review of data logs from an app Outdoor navigation Guerreiro et al. (2019) Visually impaired users Audio instructions Focus group and user testing Indoor navigation Angeletou et al. (2013) Older adults Audio-based instruction; visual navigation Focus group, questionnaire, observation, interview, and brainstorm Outdoor navigation Sato et al. (2019) Visually impaired users (blind or low vision) Audio-based instructions; visual display User testing, focus group Indoor navigation Jafari (2019) Deaf and hard of hearing users Text to speech; visual interface; vibration Survey, interview, user testing Indoor navigation Chang, Chen, et al. (2008) Cognitively impaired users Visual images; alerts when deviation from a path occurs User testing, survey Indoor navigation Chang, Chu, et al. (2008) Cognitively impaired users Visual images User testing, survey Indoor navigation Chang et al. (2009) Cognitively impaired users Videos (both visual and audio based information) Cheraghi et al. (2017) Blind and visually impaired users Voice; audio; haptic (vibrating alerts when deviation from a path occurs) User testing, survey Indoor navigation User testing Indoor navigation Kim et al. (2014) Visually impaired users Simple touch, audio instructions Prototype Indoor and outdoor navigation (continued) 6 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Table 5. Continued. No. References User group Modality Methods Application Somyat et al. (2018) Visually impaired users Audio instructions Prototype Outdoor navigation Ganz et al. (2014) Visually impaired users Touch-based interaction Prototype Indoor navigation Prerana et al. (2019) Visually impaired users Touch screen; voice inputs; audio instructions Paladugu et al. (2013) Visually impaired users Accessible touch screen (using gestures such as double tap to select); voice input; verbal descriptions Prototype Outdoor navigation User testing Outdoor navigation Chang, Tsai, et al. (2008) Cognitively impaired users Visual images and directions User testing Indoor navigation Krainz et al. (2016) Visually impaired users, Cognitively impaired users, older adults Arenghi et al. (2018) Visually impaired users, mobility impaired users Cheraghi et al. (2019) Visually impaired users, mobility impaired users Touch-based intraction User testing, survey Outdoor navigation Visual; auditory User testing, interview Outdoor navigation Visual; auditory; haptic User testing Indoor navigation Ivanov (2010) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions Interview Indoor navigation Yang et al. (2011) Visually impaired users Audio instructions; five simple touch gestures User testing, interview Indoor navigation Guy and Truong (2012) Visually impaired users Touch screen; audio instructions; speech-based data entry Formative interviews, user testing Outdoor navigation Jain et al. (2013) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions User testing, interview Indoor navigation Jain (2014b) Visually impaired users Visual; audio; vibration (vibrating alerts when deviation from a path occurs) Pilot test Indoor navigation Ryu et al. (2014) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions Protype Indoor navigation Chen et al. (2015) Visually impaired users Visual; audio; vibration Interview, user testing Outdoor navigation Kim et al. (2016) Visually impaired users Touch screen (simple gestures); auditory instructions User testing Indoor navigation Ahmetovic et al. (2016) Visually impaired users Touch screen; auditory instructions User testing Indoor and outdoor navigation Eskicioglu et al. (2020) Visually impaired users Voice commands; manual input; auditory instructions Heuristic evaluation Outdoor navigation Chatzina and Gavalas (2021) Visually impaired users Touch screen; auditory intstructions; voice-based inputs; haptic feedback when buttons were pressed User testing Outdoor navigation Firmino and Te'ofilo (2013) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions User testing Indoor navigation Jain (2014a) Visually impaired users Visual, audio, and vibration (vibrating alerts when deviation from a path occurs) Formative interviews, user testing Indoor navigation Constantinescu et al. (2019) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions User testing Outdoor navigation Griffin et al. (2020) Visually impaired users Audio and tactile navigational instructions User testing, interview, survey Indoor navigation Coughlan and Manduchi (2009) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions User testing Indoor navigation Lewis et al. (2015) Visually impaired users Audio-based navigational instructions Focus group Indoor and outdoor navigation Brock et al. (2012) Visually impaired users Touch screen (simple gestures); text- to-speech capability User testing, survey Outdoor navigation Chaudary et al. (2021) Visually impaired users Haptic and voice-based communication User testing, survey, interview, group discussion Indoor and outdoor navigation Long et al. (2016) Visually impaired users Visual; screen reading software User testing, interview, questionnaire Outdoor navigation Kahraman and Turhan (2021) Visually impaired users Visual; audio-based navigational instructions; vibration (vibrating alerts when deviation from a path occurs) User testing, questionnaire Indoor navigation Barbosa et al. (2018) Mobility impaired users Visual; Touch-based intraction User testing, surevy Indoor and outdoor navigation Harriehausen- Muhlabauter (2014) Mobility impaired users Visual; Touch-based intraction User testing Outdoor navigation (continued) INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 7 Table 5. Continued. No. References User group Modality Methods Application Karimi et al. (2014) Mobility impaired users Screen reader; audio and tactile communication; visual feedback Prototype Outdoor navigation Chang and Wang (2010b) Cognitively impaired users, Mobility impaired users, Visually impaired users Visual; auditory User testing, interview Indoor navigation Al-Khalifa and Al- Razgan (2016) Visually impaired users Voice commands and auditory navigational information; touchscreen User testing, interview Indoor navigation Chang and Wang (2010a) Garc'ıa-Catal'a et al. (2020) Cognitively impaired users Visual images; videos User testing, survey Indoor navigation Cognitively impaired users Visual; auditory Literature review, prototype Indoor navigation Rodriguez-S'anchez and Martinez- Romo (2017) Visually impaired users, Hearing impaired users, mobility impaired users, people with no disability Text; visual maps; auditory and tactile feedback User testing, questionnaire Indoor and outdoor navigation Moreno et al. (2012) Visually impaired users Speech recognition system; auditory information Prototype Indoor and outdoor navigation User group Among the 65 studies, 44 papers focused on wayfinding sol- utions specifically for people with visual impairment, 10 were related to enhancing the navigation capabilities for mobility impaired users, 15 studies designed interfaces to better navigating people with cognitive impairment, 5 were focused on designing interfaces for older adults, and 2 stud- ies proposed solutions for individuals with hearing impair- ment (found through manual search in Google Scholar). It is important to note that some studies targeted people with multiple disabilities (Comai et al., 2017; Krainz et al., 2016). Modality of information presentation A majority of studies used visual interfaces to provide navi- gational information. However, for visually impaired users, these interfaces were combined with auditory and/or haptic cues. Most studies agreed that audio feedback is essential to include in the design. Eighteen studies provided haptic or vibration feedback. This feedback was provided when the users pressed a button or deviated from a correct path. Among all of these studies, 13 interfaces supported voice command features to allow the users to speak to the sys- tem directly. Methods All of the studies except for Pr'emont et al. (2020) and a few concept or prototyping papers (Ganz et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2014; Prerana et al., 2019; Ryu et al., 2014; Somyat et al., 2018; Stent et al., 2010), recruited end-users of the target group and conducted usability evaluations to validate their concepts or applications. While some studies have con- ducted reviews of other navigation products to propose a set of design recommendations and applied those criteria to their designs, others presented details on how they have applied the user-centered design process to elaborate the use cases and scenarios that proceeded to the final design. The most common usability evaluation method used in these studies was user/field testing in which the end users were asked to use the interface for navigating through indoor or outdoor environments and the experimenter evaluated their performance and captured their subjective evaluation of the interface (using surveys or interviews at the end of the study). Applications From the 65 studies, 9 studies supported both indoor and outdoor navigations, 32 studies were designed specifically for indoor navigation, and 24 studies were designed specific- ally for outdoor navigation. Indoor navigation devices were tested in various applications including navigating in public places such as museums, shopping malls, airports, train sta- tions, and university buildings. Design guidelines for assistive navigation applications In this work, the 10 heuristic design principles proposed by Molich and Nielsen (1990) were used as a reference to iden- tify possible solutions for designing navigation systems including the principles of: visibility of system status (i.e., keep the users be aware of the system status), match between system and the real world (i.e., use words, phrases, and concepts familiar to the user), user control and freedom (i.e., allow the users to leave unwanted action), consistency and standards (i.e., follow standards and conventions), error prevention (i.e., prevent problems from occurring in the first place), recognition rather than recall (i.e., minimize the user's memory load), flexibility and efficiency of use (i.e., use shortcuts to tailor frequent actions), aesthetic and min- imalist design (i.e., exclude all irrelevant information), help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors (i.e., indi- cate the problem and suggest a solution), and help and documentation (i.e., provide assistance and documentation to help the user understand how to complete their tasks). Based on these principles, a list of design guidelines was generated from the literature review and was summarized in Table 6 along with their references. These design guidelines 8 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Table 6. The systematic literature review: Summary of design guidelines for each type of disabilities. Visual Hearing Motor Cognitive Older adults Nielsen's Principle Modality design consideration Enable multiple sensory channels (visual, auditory, and tactile) to provide information and communication. Allow the users to select their preferred modalities (Gallagher et al., 2014; Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). Enable voice control to allow the users to interact with the system with voice commands (Giudice et al., 2019; Jian et al., 2012). Include voice control and speech dialogue for users that are not able to manually interact with the navigation system (Harriehausen-M€uhlbauer, 2016). Avoid heavy text input actions as much as possible (Jian et al., 2012). Use vibrating alerts when the user deviates from the path (Chang, Chen, et al., 2008; Cheraghi et al., 2017; Jain, 2014a) Combine audio and vibration feedback in case that the blind user could not hear the audio of the application clearly in a noisy environment (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014) Visually-based interface design Keep the design simple with few or no overlapping items (Gomez & Montoro, 2015; Jian et al., 2012). Design all GUI items with proper shapes, sizes, and spaces (Jian et al., 2012). Use unified or similar fonts, colors and sizes when displaying texts (Jian et al., 2012). Avoid unnecessary and irrelevant visual effects (Jian et al., 2012). Customize color contrasts for better readability (Jian et al., 2012). Use simple and easily recognizable shape designs (Jian et al., 2012). Use unique color scheme to differentiate specific situations (Als et al., 2018). Avoid sole usage of colors or images to convey information (Jian et al., 2012). Emphasize changes on the user interface in an obvious and observable way (Jian et al., 2012). Choose proper palette for color blindness. Try monochromatic color schemes (Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Use simple language without abbreviations (Krainz et al., 2016) Important features should be visible without scrolling (Krainz et al., 2016) Make all texts and icons large enough to be readable on the communicating interfaces (Jian et al., 2012). Audio-based interface design Keep messages short and allow interruptions (Firmino & Te'ofilo, 2013; Jian et al., 2012). Design appropriate pauses since the timeliness of prompts is crucial (Liu et al., 2008). Use distinct audible tone to differentiate specific situations for blind users (Jian et al., 2012). Design verbal messages to be spatially determinant, such as "turn left when you hear the water flowing of fountain," "stop when you feel carpet under foot" (Giudice et al., 2019). Build the vocabulary with more definite articles, auxiliaries, first person pronouns and lexical items related to social interaction (Jian et al., 2012). Design synthesized texts and standardized instruction suitable for the users regarding style, vocabulary, grammar, length and sentence structures (Constantinescu et al., 2019; Jian et al., 2012). Adapt the dialogue strategies to satisfy the needs of older adults and people with mobility impairment, such as to understand the shaky or broken speech (Jian et al., 2012). Use low-pitched voices for speech synthesis for elderly users (Jian et al., 2012). Provide auditory feedback when approaching obstacles or destination (Jain, 2014a; Lewis et al., 2015) Use simple commands specifying the direction and exploiting landmarks such as doors and corridors (Comai et al., 2017). * * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * Aesthetic and minimalist design * Error prevention Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Match between system and the real world * * * * Consistency and standards * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * * Visibility of system status Flexibility and efficiency of use * Match between system and the real world * Visibility of system status * Aesthetic and minimalist design * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Consistency and standards Visibility of system status * * * Consistency and standards * * * * Match between system and the real world * * Error prevention * Aesthetic and minimalist design Visibility of system status * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use (continued) INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 9 Table 6. Continued. Tactile-based interface design Use fixed regions when designing interfaces (Rodriguez- Sanchez et al., 2014). Use simple gestures (e.g., tap, double tap) (Griffin et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2014; Paladugu et al., 2013) Use gestures that can be performed with one hand (Yang et al., 2011) Use various but fixed vibration patterns to indicate different situations (Als et al., 2018). The level of vibration should depend on the proximity to the destination, landmark, or obstacle (Rodriguez-S'anchez & Martinez-Romo, 2017). Information display and communication Provide clear and repeated turn-by-turn instructions (Gallagher et al., 2014; Sili et al., 2017). Use turn-based directions to navigate is easier than landmark-based directions (Liu et al., 2009). Incorporate description and identification of landmarks (Gallagher et al., 2014; Lewis et al., 2015). Provide landmark names to help the user to remember the unfamiliar landmarks for future use (Liu et al., 2009). Present landmark pictures to help users visually identify the location of points (Gomez et al., 2015). Offer multiple densities of information to different users. Blind users might need the densest amount of feedback and instructions compared to other users (Nair et al., 2020). Provide real-time information (street signs, pedestrian crossing, route instructions) and appropriate confirmations (feedback) in proper frequency to the users, and alert users about the physical references (obstacles) (Giudice et al., 2019; Gomez et al., 2015; Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). Divide the route into simpler steps to help people with cognitive disability better understand the instructions (Gomez et al., 2015). Present a street-level landmark photograph with every instruction to assist people with cognitive disability better identify the location of points, as well as the directions. Combine the instructions with real images of the landmarks (Gomez et al., 2015; Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Deliver the direction instructions in appropriate time and speed (avoid delays, or too quick, too close instructions) (Liu et al., 2009; Sili et al., 2017). Show progress bar to users to illustrate how far the user is from the shown destination point (Gomez et al., 2015). Provide the option of moving forward to the next step or backward to see a previous instruction via one click (Gomez et al., 2015; Sili et al., 2017). System automated assistant Measure and guide to ensure the user is facing the correct direction (Nair et al., 2020). Detect user deviations and realign the path for users (Comai et al., 2017; Gomez & Montoro, 2015; Nair et al., 2020). Compute a detour in case the chosen route does not work, e.g., when the route contains barriers (Harriehausen- M€uhlbauer, 2016). Adaptation to user's needs Allow for customization of size and type of wheelchair (e.g., active wheelchair users, electric wheelchair users, wheelchair users that have an assistant) (Harriehausen-Muhlabauter, 2014; Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). Allow for customization of the user profiles (individual physical conditions and limitations such as the number of stairs that can be mastered) (Harriehausen- M€uhlbauer, 2016). Plan and schedule users' paths and activities based on their specific needs, e.g., avoid stairs (Comai et al., 2017). Adapt route calculation by including places that are well- known to the user instead of delivering the shortest or fastest route (Gomez et al., 2015; Herv'as et al., 2014). Preferences and support Offer help instantly with the user's preferred way and preferred contacts (Gomez et al., 2015). Visual Hearing Motor Cognitive Older adults Nielsen's Principle * * * * * Consistency and standards Match between system and the real world User control and freedom * * * * Consistency and standards * * Error prevention * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * Error prevention * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * Aesthetic and minimalist design Visibility of system status Error prevention Visibility of system status * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * Visibility of system status * * * * User control and freedom * * * * Error prevention * * * * Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors * * * * Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Flexibility and efficiency of use Flexibility and efficiency of use * Flexibility and efficiency of use * * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use (continued) 10 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Table 6. Continued. Provide options for users to choose their preferred mode of interaction, language, customized frequency and speed of speech instructions, sound, unit of distance, etc. (Cheraghi et al., 2019; Griffin et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2015) Include distant unit preference in imperial (feet), metric (meters), in steps, or in general (Gallagher et al., 2014; Giudice et al., 2019). Other considerations Present the user with a list of the possible destination points (previously created list) to choose from. Do not require them to input the address manually (Gomez et al., 2015; Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Use text displays when auditory information is missed- or not heard (Jian et al., 2012). Instruct the users with visual impairment to find the buttons of the elevator and notify them when the elevator doors open (Nair et al., 2020). Allow for the inclusion of both static as well as temporary barriers (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). Mark the barriers such as steep ramps, stairs, bouldering, and other uneven footpath surfacing on a chosen route (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). Provide easy access to the caregiver to edit destination for the users (Gomez et al., 2015). Provide communication and supervision tool to user's caregivers and relatives (Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Provide online and offline mode to access the information and navigation anywhere and anytime (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). Include a "where am I?" function to allow the users scan their environment and see what is around them (Lewis et al., 2015). Display routes with and without barriers and identify the type of barrier (Harriehausen-Muhlabauter, 2014). Visual Hearing Motor Cognitive Older adults Nielsen's Principle * * User control and freedom * * * * * Consistency and standards * * * * * Recognition rather than recall, flexibility and efficiency of use * * * * Error prevention Visibility of system status Visibility of system status Visibility of system status * Error prevention * Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Recognition rather than recall Visibility of system status were categorized into nine groups. We have identified the types of disabilities that would greatly benefit from the implementation of each design guideline. In addition, the design guidelines are matched to the categories of Nielsen's principles (Nielsen, 1994). In the following para- graphs, we discussed these design guidelines in detail. It is important to note that these guidelines should be considered in addition to the general guidelines for mobile devices (Li & Luximon, 2020; Patch et al., 2015). Modality design considerations. the modality of information presentation and communication is a critical feature and should be adapted to users' needs and preferences (Gallagher et al., 2014; Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). The use of appropriate input and output modalities can ensure that the information would be conveyed effectively. For example, enabling the voice commands and avoiding the manual interaction with the system as much as possible will help free the hands of motor disabled users to push their wheelchairs. Audio and tactile cues can notify blind or visu- ally impaired users when it is time to make a turn. For indi- viduals with hearing impairment, a combination of visual and tactile feedback should be used to alert them and a combination of audio and vibration feedback can be a good solution when a blind user could not hear the audio from the application in noisy environments (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). Thus, the system should support multiple modalities for providing landmark information, navigating instructions, and communications based on user groups and preferences. Visual-based interface design. in this category, we summar- ized several guidelines that focus on utilizing visual commu- nication to effectively deliver information to the users. To increase the readability of the system, all the visual designs and layout should be simple (Gomez & Montoro, 2015; Jian et al., 2012). All graphical user interface (GUI) items should be adjusted to proper shapes, sizes, and put in proper loca- tions (Jian et al., 2012). The important display features should be visible without the need for scrolling. The overlap between items should be minimized, all text should be dis- played with a unified design style (in fonts, colors, and sizes), and any irrelevant visual effects should be excluded to catch the user's attention (Jian et al., 2012). In addition, strong color contrast usually comes with better readability (Jian et al., 2012). The more effective and accurate the inter- faces can display the content, the better the users under- stand and interact with the system. It is recommended to use shapes and icons that are easy to be recognized (Jian et al., 2012). The metaphor icons can help the users to build the natural mapping and understand the functionality behind the button quickly. For example, use the microphone icon to take voice inputs from the user, use the five-pointed star icon to save the favorite items, use the shopping cart icon to represent the placeholder for the grocery store, etc. While the use of unique color schemes can assist in INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 11 differentiating different modes of the system, it is better to avoid using colors or pictures alone to convey information (Jian et al., 2012). Text description is needed to better intro- duce the system context. When the user interacts with the system, it is also effective to timely provide visual cues to the users to be aware of the changes (e.g., change the color of a button while the user presses it). In addition, to assist individuals with color blindness or any adults with visual impairment, it is necessary to choose a proper palette such as monochromatic color schemes (Gomez & Montoro, 2015). All essential visual cues such as texts and icons should be large enough to be readable on the screen specif- ically for people with visual impairment (Jian et al., 2012). Audio-based interface design. the audio instructions should use language and terms that are intuitive and familiar to the users. The text should be adapted to different user groups regarding the style, vocabulary, length, and sentence struc- tures (Jian et al., 2012). In addition, the voice message should be short, with proper pauses between two auditory feedback, and allow for interruptions (Firmino & Te'ofilo, 2013; Jian et al., 2012). Consistent and distinct audible tones should be used to indicate the different situations (Jian et al., 2012). This design will specifically benefit people with visual impairment in differentiating the specific situations. In addition, incorporating the description and distinguishing characteristics of landmarks will help the user identify and recognize them better (Giudice et al., 2019). Especially for blind users, the use of spatially determinant audio messages such as "stop when you feel the carpet underfoot" to provide additional navigation instructions will be helpful. For recog- nizing the speech input by the users, the vocabulary should be built with more natural language during daily social interactions. It is recommended to include synthesized texts, standardized instructions, and dialogue structures to cope with the specific needs and customization of different groups of users (Constantinescu et al., 2019; Jian et al., 2012). Especially for older adults and for people with mobil- ity impairments, there is a need to support fuzzy recognition of voice inputs to cope dialogue strategies with their specific needs such as repeating and shaky speech. Older adults pre- fer to interact with low-pitch voices of speech synthesis (Jian et al., 2012). Furthermore, simple commands should be used to specify directions and explore landmarks for all types of users (Comai et al., 2017). Tactile-based interface design. Structuring the user interface with fixed regions is especially helpful in reducing the cogni- tive workload of users (Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2014). Simple gestures are recommended, such as taping or double tapping (Kim et al., 2014; Paladugu et al., 2013). It is neces- sary to use various but fixed vibration patterns to indicate different situations (Als et al., 2018). This can be particularly helpful for blind people to receive feedback accurately. Furthermore, the gestures should be simple enough so they can be performed with one hand and the user can hold a cane or a guide dog with another hand (Yang et al., 2011). Information display and communication. in general, clear and repeated turn-by-turn instructions in addition to infor- mation on landmarks should be provided (Gallagher et al., 2014; Sili et al., 2017). The use of turn-based directions has been identified to be easier to follow than landmark-based directions since the user can better understand the instruc- tions that divide the route into simpler steps and does not have to remember the details of navigation (Liu et al., 2009). In addition, it is beneficial to incorporate the landmark name, description, and photo to help the user better identify the location and remember the unfamiliar landmarks for future use (Gomez et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2009). However, multiple densities of information should be provided to dif- ferent users based on their needs (Nair et al., 2020). For example, people who are blind require more details and real-time information regarding the objects around them such as street signs, doors, pedestrian crossing, and obstacles. They need the densest amount of feedback and instructions to navigate compared to other users. For people with cognitive impairment, they can better understand the route instruction if the navigating massage has been divided into simpler steps (Gomez et al., 2015). They can also navi- gate better if the instruction is combined with a street-level photo of the landmark (Gomez et al., 2015; Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Another crucial factor in delivering instruc- tion effectively is the timeline. The system should timely notify the users about the surrounding situation, and deliver the turn-by-turn instructions in proper frequency and speed without delay (Liu et al., 2009; Sili et al., 2017). Letting the user be aware of the system status with a progress bar can also be beneficial. Information regarding the travel progress should be provided to let the user know how far they are from the shown destination point. For example, the interface can visually display or read the estimated arrival time and distance of travel to the users. It might also be beneficial to allow the user to move forward to pre-view the next step and move back to check the previous instructions using one-click or voice command so that the user feels more con- trol and freedom in using the application (Gomez et al., 2015; Sili et al., 2017). System automated assistant. the system should always meas- ure and prevent the user from deviation (Comai et al., 2017; Gomez & Montoro, 2015; Nair et al., 2020). For example, by prompting instant feedback to make sure the user is facing the correct direction. If the user is heading the wrong way, the system should be able to detect the deviation, send real- time reminders, and timely realign the path for the user. In case when the original chosen route does not work, the sys- tem should also have the capability of computing a detour for the users (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). Adaptation to user's needs. the system should be adaptable according to users' needs and preferences. For people with mobility impairment, the system should allow them to cus- tomize their user profiles by inputting the size and type of the wheelchair, or recording the individual physical condi- tion (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). Thus, the system can 12 M. ZAHABI ET AL. search and plan suitable places and special routes based on the size and type of the user's wheelchair and with their movement capabilities. In addition, instead of delivering the shortest and fastest route to them, the system should present a route that includes the places that are well-known to this group of users to reduce cognitive workload (Gomez et al., 2015; Herv'as et al., 2014). Preferences and support. instant help should be provided to users (Gomez et al., 2015). For example, they could make a selection of whether to contact their family or care providers for help with video or audio calls. For preference setting, the system should allow the users to select their preferred modalities, or preferred distant unit when receiving the navigation instructions (Gallagher et al., 2014; Giudice et al., 2019). Other considerations. in this category, we have included a few more solutions that are designed for people with disabil- ities. Generally, the system should provide category and nearby search queries. Instead of asking the user to input address manually, the system should assist the users to recall than remember by presenting a list of the possible destin- ation points to choose from (e.g., search by restaurants, gro- cery stores, or departments and offices in a building) (Gomez et al., 2015; Gomez & Montoro, 2015). Text displays can help when auditory information is missing or cannot be heard (Jian et al., 2012). Note that this alternative solution is only effective for people who can hear and rely on receiving information using auditory feedback. It would be beneficial to include a feature that helps visually impaired people to accurately locate the buttons of the elevator and notify them when the elevator doors open (Nair et al., 2020). The live sharing and updates on barrier information and route acces- sibility will benefit the whole community, especially for peo- ple with mobility impairment. The system should allow the user to report the existing or absence of physical references such as obstacles and architectural barriers in real-time (Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, 2016). This feature needs the sys- tem to be enabled with the barrier markers for both per- manent and temporary existing barriers. For older adults or cognitively impaired people who may need assistance from their caregivers and relatives, the system should give those caregivers and relatives easy access to edit destinations for the users, and to supervise and communicate with them (Gomez et al., 2015). Finally, if both online and offline modes are available, the users will be able to access the information and navigate anywhere and anytime without the need of worrying about the internet connection (Rodriguez- Sanchez et al., 2014). Summary of content analysis on mobile applications Description of the apps The characteristics of the 45 relevant apps are summarized in Table 7. In total, we found 15 assistive navigation apps designed for people with mobility impairment, 25 assistive apps for people with hearing impairment, one assistive app for people with cognitive impairment, and 7 assistive apps for older adults from the iOS Apple store and Google play store. The navigation apps were mainly designed for finding accessible places or guiding people with physical impair- ments to avoid obstacles, architectural barriers, or inaccess- ible routes. The hearing disabled assistive apps were designed for improving the communication capability for this group of people by analyzing and processing the sur- rounding sound. People with hearing impairment can hear the world around them better with amplified sound, can receive the real-time information effectively by reading the text translated from the spoken language, or can convert the sign languages into speech and text with the help of those apps. The applications of the seven assistive apps for older adults were more diversified. While three of them were designed for helping older adults to establish a daily exercise route, one supported older adults who are living on their own by providing timely alerts to their family members if a safety issue is suspected, and one was designed for aiding people age 75 years and older considering cardiac catheter- ization as treatment for a heart attack. Also, the navigation apps for older adults were designed to be simple and allowed them to enlarge the text in the setting. Thirty-one (31) out of the 45 apps have been updated within one year. Twenty (20) apps were rated four stars or above, the average rating across the 29 apps (with valid rat- ings) was 3.9. In total, the 45 apps had 9,530 reviews in the Apple App store or Google play store. Specifically, "Hear Boost: Enhanced Recorder" received the most reviews of 4753. Due to the unbalanced number of reviews among the apps and limited access to view full reviews, we were not able to retrieve information by performing a content analysis with user reviews in this study. However, we do believe this can be a future direction if we can gain more access to those reviews. Among the 45 apps, there were 24 apps supported more than one language. Specifically, "Rogervoice" with 80 languages, "SpeakLiz: for deaf people" with 33 languages, and "CaptionMate" with 25 languages were the three apps that supported the most number of languages. Content analysis of the apps The design features included in the selective assistive apps for each type of disability are summarized in Table 8. For each disability category, we also counted the frequency (n) and percentage presence (%) of each feature. Hearing impairment. Almost half of the apps (11/ 25) in this category included the sound recognition system that can convert voice (human voices, music, animals, vehicles) into text, thus the hearing-impaired people can "hear" what is going on by reading the converted text. Also, the system can generate a voice from text inputted by the user, which will help the people without any hearing impair- ment better "hear" the user with hearing impairment. This voice-to-text and text-to-voice design help improve the effi- ciency of the information exchange between the users. Less than half the selected apps (8/25) in this category allow the Table 7. A summary of assistive apps' characteristics. Name Developer Version Last update App rating Number of reviews Number of supported languages Target Groups Application SpeakLiz: for deaf people Talov Inc. 4 April, 2021 3 2 33 Hearing impairment Communication Transcribe Voice Kyo Chin 2.0 Mar, 2021 – 0 5 Hearing impairment Lifestyle Ava: Best Live Transcription Transcense Inc. 2.2.6 Mar, 2021 4.3 454 6 Hearing impairment Communication Hear Boost: Future Moments 1.6 Jan, 2021 4 4,753 12 Hearing impairment Communication Enhanced Recorder Rogervoice Rogervoice 4.21.9 Apr, 2022 3.4 1233 80 Hearing impairment Communication Listening device, hearing aid Alecander Bredikhin 2.0.4 Jan, 2021 4.2 297 19 Hearing impairment Medical Petralex Hearing Aid App IT ForYou 2.14.2 Mar, 2021 4.2 958 19 Hearing impairment Medical Easy to hear: hearing aid app IT ForYou 1.6.10 Mar, 2021 4.7 63 2 Hearing impairment Utilities BSL education nuom 1.0.4–speedy Jun, 2021 2 20 1 Hearing impairment Education and training Sign Language for Luminous Lunar 1.0.4 Jan, 2021 3.3 27 1 Hearing impairment Education and training Beginners Guide Sign Language For Beginners Aesthetic Apps 1.3 Oct, 2020 2.9 476 1 Hearing impairment Education and training Cycle Safely Cyclebell.co.uk 2.0 Nov, 2021 – 0 1 Hearing impairment travel safety Hearing amplifier, hearing aid HEARING AID. LTD 1.0.5 May, 2020 4.6 57 19 Hearing impairment Medical CaptionMate Clarity Products 2.4.1 Feb, 2021 4.6 14 25 Hearing impairment Lifestyle TD NEWZ—TREND AND AHMED KAZEKA 1.5 Mar,2021 – 0 1 Hearing and visual impairment News and Magazine DAILY NEWZ Earfy live subtitles/captions Earfy NV 1.2.3 June, 2019 2.0 4 3 Hearing impairment Health & Fitness Visualfy Visualfy 5.19.1 Mar, 2021 – 0 2 Hearing impairment Utilities MAVIS App Land Transport Authority 2.6.0 May, 2021 1 2 1 Hearing, visual, and Navigation and SG mobility impairment Feira Museus Realizasom 1.0.1 Mar, 2021 – 0 2 Hearing and visual impairment Navigation Walk Viseu Realizasom 1.2.0 May, 2021 – 0 4 Hearing and visual impairment Navigation Albufeira Municipal Museum Realizasom 1.1.1 Jul, 2020 – 0 5 Hearing and visual impairment Tourism of Archaeology VGuide SMA Sharjah Museums 1.0 Apr, 2022 – 0 2 Hearing impairment Tourism MNAz—Museu do Azulejo Realizasom 3.0.0 May, 2021 4.5 4 2 Hearing and visual impairment Tourism Costume Museum Realizasom 1.1 Sep, 2021 – 0 4 Hearing and visual impairment Tourism Streetco Artil 1.9.3 April, 2021 4.1 59 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Roll Mobility Roll App Inc 2.0.3 Feb, 2021 5 3 1 Mobility impairment Navigation iAccess Life—Accessibility iAccess Innovations 2.2 Dec, 2020 4.7 53 1 Mobility impairment Navigation WheelMate Coloplast 1.0.7 April, 2020 4.3 7 5 Mobility impairment Navigation WheelMap Sozialhelden 5.1.0 April, 2020 2.6 6 2 Mobility impairment Navigation AccessNow Accessibility Now 1.60.0 Mar, 2021 4.6 5 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Route4U Route4U 1.8.5 Dec, 2019 – 0 1 Mobility impairment Navigation AccessAble DisabledGo 2.1.9 Mar, 2021 – 0 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Ginto AccessibilityGuide 2.3.8.1690 Sep, 2021 5 1 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Scotland Transport: Smart Cities Transport, Varies with device Jun, 2021 – 0 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Wheelchair, Maps, Sydney NSW, Routeplanner (Early Access) Route Planners Waverley Transport: Maps, Smart Cities Transport, 2020–08–15 23 Aug, 2020 – 0 1 Mobility impairment Navigation Timetable, Route Planner Sydney NSW, (Early Access) Route Planners Accessible Jordan dot.jo Co. 1.2.0 Jan, 2022 – 0 2 Mobility impairment and older adults Navigation Pokeguide Pokeguide Limited 3.0.14 Mar, 2022 4.9 999 1 Mobility and visual impairment Navigation Transportation App BillionAbles Billion Ables Services Pvt Ltd 2.3 May, 2020 4.7 10 1 Mobility, hearing, and Navigation visual impairment Dooinwell-for older adults Dooinwell 1.0.9 April, 2021 – 0 4 Older adults Safer independent living (continued) 14 M. ZAHABI ET AL. user to adjust the volume and speed of the voice. Specifically, the two apps "Transcribe Voice" and "Earfy live subtitles/captions" support the flip of the text, thus, the user can present the written note to other people without the need of rotating the phone screen. Since people with hearing impairment mainly rely on observing the screen to obtain information, a few apps (6/25) use large font sizes and icons and allow the users to adjust the font size, font color, and background color to improve the readability of the apps based on their needs. Four apps could identify the sign lan- guage of the users and convert them to speech and text to deliver information to people who do not understand it. Specifically, "Visualfy" can allow the user to communicate with the customer care service using the sign language. Furthermore, "Visualfy" can recognize the surrounding sounds such as fire alarms, doorbell, alarm clock, and baby crying, then turn them into visual (color) or sensory (vibra- tion) alerts. Some of the apps (5/25) were able to enhance the voice filter in a noisy environment, which could improve the hearing capability of people with hearing impairment for certain conversations and sounds. In addition, some apps (5/25) provided sign language for education/informa- tional videos. Mobility impairment. Some apps (6/15) ask the user to create their profiles at the very beginning of using the apps. Thus, the system can better search for accessible places or calculate the accessible routes that fit the user's wheel- chair size or physical conditions. Most of the apps (9/15) support the nearby searches or category searches of access- ible places for the users. A few apps (5/15) allow the user to mark their favorite places, and enable the user to revisit both the favorites and history lists. Six apps can retrieve the results of searched places and allow the user to preview rele- vant information regarding the places, such as the address, phone numbers, hours of operation, and the accessibility information of places. During the navigation process, some apps can provide the real-time estimated arrival time, dis- tance, and other travel information to the users, and there were two apps that use audio instructions to notify the user. Four of the apps support real-time reporting of obstacles and architectural barriers. Six of the apps allow the user to leave reviews and ratings for accessible places regarding the overall access and bathroom access. Four apps offer the abil- ity to share the user's location, which may be helpful if the user needs to contact someone for help. Only one app (Streetco) enables the user to interact with the system through voice commands. Older adults. Within the seven assistive apps designed for older adults, four used large sizes of visual ele- ments (e.g., fonts, icons) and high color contrast to improve the readability of the contents in the apps. More than half of the apps (4/7) of the apps include the calendar view of activates and reminders that allow the older adults to better manage their to-do lists. Only one app (Dooinwell-for older adults) that is designed to support the older adult to live independently and safely has enabled the location tracking INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 15 Table 8. Design features included in assistive apps for people with different types of disabilities. Design features Prevalence of features in apps n (%) I. Hearing impairment (Based on 25 reviewed apps) Convert voice-to-text and text-to-voice in real-time 11 (44) Provide adjustable speed & volume of voice 8 (32) Use of large font and icon size 6 (24) Provide adjustable font and background color 10 (40) Recognize sign language 4 (16) Filter noise and increase the volume of the audio output 5 (20) Recognize sounds (e.g., fire alarm, doorbell) and alert the users 1 (4) Provide Sign language for educational/informational videos 5 (20) Provide subtitles for videos 1 (4) Provide captions for incoming and live calls/ transcribe voicemails 1 (4) Provide notifications (e.g., vibration) when a pedestrian or cyclist is approaching 1 (4) II. Mobility impairment (Based on 15 reviewed apps) Allow pre-setting of user profile, e.g., use manual/electric wheelchair 6 (40) Allow for nearby searches of accessible places around the user 9 (60) Allow for category searches 5 (33) Provide favorite and history list 5 (33) Calculate accessible routes, e.g., wheelchair route 7 (46) Provide estimated arrival time and distance of travel 5 (33) Support audio instructions and guidance 2 (13) Support real-time reports, e.g., obstacles and architectural barriers 4 (26) Provide detailed information for each place, e.g., address, phone 6 (40) Leave review and rating for accessible places, e.g., rate bathroom access 6 (40) Allow for sharing of locations 4 (26) Allow voice commands, can speak to app 1 (6) Provide information regarding accessibility of different areas within a building 3 (45) III. Older adults (Based on 7 reviewed apps) Use of large text and icon 4 (57) Use of high color contrast 5 (71) Coordinate calendar, set reminders, manage to-do list 4 (57) Use of older adults' pictures as cover picture 2 (28) Enable GPS and location tracking 1 (14) Provide updates and alerts for the family 1 (14) Provide customizable voice command shortcut 1 (14) Set emergency contacts and being able to call them 1 (14) Notify emergency contacts automatically in case of emergencies 1 (14) IV. Cognitive impairment (Based on one reviewed app) Provide reminders with specific actions, timing, and images 1 (100) feature of users and family alerting feature. Also, the Dooinwell-for older adults is the only app that can get the voice input of older users to interact with the system. Cognitive impairment. Only one app (i.e., MemClock) was found to help people with cognitive impair- ment. This app provides reminders to the users with specific actions, timing, and images (e.g., a message that says "it is 10 am in the morning, you need to eat your breakfast" with an image of sunrise). Design guidelines generated from apps' review Based on the content analysis of the 45 assistive apps, we have identified 10 additional design guidelines that have not been covered by the systematic literature review. These design guidelines were listed in Table 9 along with the related Nielsen's principles and the target benefi- ciary population. The system should stick to familiar interface conventions based on the users' expectations. One easy way to imple- ment this solution is to allow the users to choose the most comfortable and familiar ways of interacting with the sys- tem, which may include the settings of language, distant unit, the preferred route type, color theme, text sizes, speak- ing rate or pitch, and voice command shortcuts. The tran- scription between voice and text not only enhances the communication between people, but can also increase the efficiency of information exchange between the users. This feature is especially helpful for people with hearing impair- ment if the system can recognize sounds such as a fire alarm and timely alert them with visual or tactile cues. In a noisy environment, the users may not be able to hear the audio of the application clearly. Thus, the capability of filtering noise and amplifying weak sounds will help prevent the user from missing important audio information. Allowing the users to create and organize their own list of favorite places can help them to quickly and easily search for a direct route to their favorite traveled places in the future. Similarly, if the system can help record the history list, that will provide the users with easy access to revisit their search record. After the search, the system should allow the user to preview relevant information regarding the places in the retrieved results. For example, by providing the accessibility information and phone number of restaurants, the wheelchair users can bet- ter decide which place to pick and can call ahead to confirm the reservation. Except for the accessibility description pro- vided by the accessible places themselves, the user reviews and ratings regarding the overall access, entrance access, and bathroom access will be useful sources to help people with disabilities to evaluate the accessibility of the places. Since older adults or people with cognitive impairment tend to forget things and feel lost more easily, the application should help this group of people to organize and manage 16 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Table 9. The scoping review of apps: Summary of design guidelines. Allow the user to customize system features, e.g., color theme, text size, speaking rate or pitch, and voice command shortcuts. Visual Hearing Motor Cognitive Older adults Nielsen's Principle * * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Convert between voice and text in real-time. * * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Notify the users when an emergency or hazardous situation occurs. * * * * * Visibility of system status Filter and reduce noise & amplify weak sounds. * * * * * Error prevention Allow the user to revisit favorite and history lists. * * * * * Recognition rather than recall Provide quick access to some key information of searched place, e.g., address, phone, hours of operation. Allow the user to share their reviews and ratings regard the accessibility of places, e.g., if a place is wheelchair-friendly with accessible entry and restrooms. Provide a list of reminders in calendar review to help older adults or people with memory loss better manage their to- do list. * * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use * * Recognition rather than recall Send updates and alerts to the user's family and caregiver. * * Error prevention Share user's current location/destination * * * * * Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors Table 10. Additional design guidelines for each type of disabilities. Visual Hearing Motor Cognitive Older adults Nielsen's Principle Provide user's real-time location and orientation information. * * * * * Visibility of system status Give continuous instructions when the app is in background. * * * * * Visibility of system status Allow cancelation of current interaction. * * * * * User control and freedom Support reverse route search. * * * * * Flexibility and efficiency of use Provide instant live help and remote assistance. * * * * * Help and documentation Include tutorials in the system. * * * * * Help and documentation Allow the user to provide feedback using "contact us." * * * * * Help and documentation Figure 1. Prototype: Part I. (a) Tutorial page. (b) Home page. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 17 Figure 2. Prototype: Part II. (a) Favorite page. (b) Around me page. (c) Where am I page. (d) Parking garages and exits page. (e) Voice-controlled page. their to-do list in their preferred way and remind them in time, and notify their families or caregivers when detecting any abnormal activities from the users. In addition, with the enabled GPS and location tracking, the system can allow the users to share their current locations and destinations if they get lost. Discussion Additional design guidelines Besides the 75 design guidelines generated from the review of relevant literature and assistive apps, we have identified seven additional guidelines in Table 10 based on our previ- ous study (Zheng et al., 2021). It is recommended that the system convey the real-time location and orientation infor- mation of the user so that the users know where they are, whether they are heading to their destination in the right direction. For example, if the real-time location of the users can be displayed in the built-in map, the user will be able to have a sense of proximity within the real world. In add- ition, the system should allow the user to select if they want to receive the continuous instructions when the app is in the background operations. When the app is running in the background, the user can still receive navigation instructions 18 M. ZAHABI ET AL. Figure 3. Prototype: Part III. (a) Help page. (b) Settings page I. (c) Settings page II. (d) Emergency page. (e) Navigating in emergency page. via auditory messages. However, this design guideline might not be appropriate for people with hearing impairment. The system should always display the reverse buttons (e.g., undo, cancel) in an obvious way, thus, the user can easily cancel the action or exit from navigation when performing an unwanted action by mistake. Supporting reverse route search in the application will allow the user to quickly switch between searching of the route from A to B with the route from B to A. Providing instant live help and remote assistance that is easily recognizable and accessible is neces- sary. Whenever the users need assistance, the system should offer support either via a chatbot or via a human representative based on the characteristics of the user groups. For example, the system should allow individuals with hearing impairment to communicate with the customer care service in sign language. Tutorials in proper modalities should also be provided to give a step-by-step guide on where to start and how to use the application for first-time users. For example, an audio tutorial should be provided to users with low vision. In addition, the help documentation should be easy to search. Finally, the system should include a "contact us" page to allow the user to provide feedback and request features that may help improve the accessibility of the app. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 19 Figure 4. Prototype: Part IV. (a) Store information page. (b) Navigation page. Prototype of the navigation system To demonstrate how the generated guidelines can be imple- mented, we designed a prototype of a universal indoor navi- gating app for a shopping mall with Adobe XD. Wayfinding is still a challenge in many indoor environments, especially those that are geographically large, such as shopping malls. The implemented design guidelines have been listed for each application scenario using numbers (1) – (82) from Tables 6, 9, and 10. Implementation of design guidelines regarding information presentation modality, visually-based interface design, and tactile-based interface design Figure 1 illustrates the app tutorial and home pages. The numbers in parenthesis (e.g., G (1)) indicate how the spe- cific guidelines from Tables 6, 9, and 10 were implemented in the prototype. The user can use the app to navigate to places within the shopping mall. When the app is opened for the first time, a tutorial will be displayed to guide the user on how to use the app (see Figure 1(a)). After the tutorial is complete, the user will be on the home screen (see Figure 1(b)) where they will have the option to search for a specific destination or choose from four big buttons (i.e., favorites, around me, where am I, and parking & exit). Implementation of design guidelines regarding information presentation modality, visually-based interface design, information display and communication, and other considerations Figure 2 illustrates some of the specific functionalities of the app including the "faviorates," "around me," "where am I," "list of parking garages," and "voice-controlled" pages. The "favorites" button will display a screen with a list of all the locations the user has favorited/saved in the past. This list will also display images of the locations to help the user eas- ily recognize the place (see Figure 2(a)). The "around me" button will show different categories of the types of places around the user to help them easily choose where they want to go (see Figure 2(b)). This feature is especially useful for older adults and those with cognitive disabilities as it will simplify the process of choosing a destination. The "where am I" button displays a map and address showing the user's current location and help them scan their environment to see what is around them (see Figure 2(c)) (Lewis et al., 2015). It also provides a written and verbal description of their surroundings. The "parking & exit" button provides a list of the nearby parking garages and exits for the user to navigate to (see Figure 2(d)). All the app screens have a microphone icon in the upper right corner. This is the voice- controlled menu that can be used by pressing the icon and speaking to the phone (see Figure 2(e)). The voice-controlled menu provides a few examples of phrases that can be used. This feature is helpful for visually impaired and cognitively impaired people, as well as older adults. Implementation of design guidelines regarding visually-based interface design, information display and communication, and preference and support Figure 3 illustrates the app's four tabs (Home, Help, Settings, and Emergency) at the bottom of the screen. The functionalities of the "home" screen have been described previously. The "Help" screen offers five options of contact for the user to choose from. They can call 911, send their location to their family, contact their family, contact the 20 M. ZAHABI ET AL. mall volunteers for live help, or contact their doctor (see Figure 3(a)). For contacting their family and mall volunteers, they have the options of text message, phone call, or video chat. The Settings screen has various options that can be cus- tomized to the user's preferences. Some of these include units, text size, vibrational alerts, volume, speaking rate, color mode, and language (see Figure 3(b)). There is also an option to leave feedback for the app developers (see Figure 3(c)). Additionally, the "instructions" button on this screen will allow the user to replay the tutorial and read/hear step-by-step instructions on how to use the app. The Emergency screen begins navigating the user to the nearest exit in the case of an emergency where they need to evacuate the building immediately (see Figure 3(d, e)). It also includes the option to call 911 and send their location to their family members. Implementation of design guidelines regarding information display and communication and adaptation to user's needs Figure 4 provides more information on the navigation cap- ability of the prototype. When the user selects a destination, a screen with the destination's photo, the distance of travel, hours of operation, phone number, and wheelchair route availability is displayed (see Figure 4(a)). Then the user can choose to navigate to that location. The navigation routes offer four options (walking, wheelchair, elevator, and no stairs) (see Figure 4(b)). This allows the user to choose the route which is most suitable for their needs. 4.2.4. Implementation of design guidelines regarding information presentation modality and tactile-based interface design Some features of the app that are not shown in the screens themselves are the audio/vibrational capabilities. All the text in the app can be read aloud if double tapped. This is useful for individuals with visual or cognitive impairments. There are also auditory and vibrational alerts in the case of an emergency to alert the user. Vibrational alerts are also used during navigation to guide the user along the path and notify them of any upcoming landmarks. These vibrational alerts are helpful for visually and hearing-impaired individuals since it easily notifies them of the status of their surroundings. Conclusions The objective of this work was to formulate a set of design guidelines that can be used to improve the accessibility of navigation apps for people with various types of disabilities. We developed a list of design guidelines based on the insights gained from reviewing the literature and qualita- tively analyzing the relevant apps. In total, 82 design guide- lines were proposed and categorized based on Nielsen's usability principles. To validate and demonstrate how the design guidelines can be applied to design the navigation system, we developed an interface prototype to assist the user to navigate places within a shopping mall. The prototype has demonstrated that the proposed design guide- lines are easily applicable and provided a roadmap for the future design of navigation apps for people with different types of disabilities. This study had some limitations that need to be addressed in future research. The current version of design guidelines is generated from the literature review and app analysis. To validate and refine the set of design guidelines, we conducted a heuristic evaluation study with five usability experts (Shahini et al., Under review) and are currently con- ducting user testing with individuals with visual, cognitive, hearing, or mobility impairment and older adults. The find- ings of heuristic evaluation and user testing with 28 human participants with disabilities suggested that all users could complete the tasks (e.g., find the nearest bathroom or emer- gency exit) and found the interface to be useful for indoor navigation. They provided specific comments on how to improve the visibility and consistency of the interface and prevent errors. Another limitation is that the proposed guidelines were focused on designing navigation apps for people with disabilities. However, combining different func- tionalities in one app (e.g., navigation, workout, etc.) might be beneficial and need to be explored in future research. Acknowledgments Funding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation [No. CNS-1951864]. The views and opinions expressed are those of authors. Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s). Funding This work was supported by the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, National Science Foundation [No. CNS-1951864]. References Ahmetovic, D., Gleason, C., Ruan, C., Kitani, K., Takagi, H., & Asakawa, C. (2016). NavCog: A navigational cognitive assistant for the blind [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. Al-Khalifa, S., & Al-Razgan, M. (2016). Ebsar: Indoor guidance for the visually impaired. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 54, 26–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2016.07.015 Al-Razgan, M., Almoaiqel, S., Alrajhi, N., Alhumegani, A., Alshehri, A., Alnefaie, B., AlKhamiss, R., & Rushdi, S. (2021). A systematic litera- ture review on the usability of mobile applications for visually impaired users. PeerJ. Computer Science, 7, e771. https://peerj.com/ articles/cs-771/ Als, A., King, A., Johnson, K., & Sargeant, R. (2018). BluKane: An obs- tacle avoidance navigation app to assist the visually impaired [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the International Conference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs. Angeletou, A., Garschall, M., Hochleitner, C., & Tscheligi, M. (2013). "I need to know, I cannot, I don't understand": Older users' INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 21 requirements for a navigation Application. In Assistive technology: From research to practice (pp. 34–39). IOS Press. Arenghi, A., Belometti, S., Brignoli, F., Fogli, D., Gentilin, F., & Plebani, N. (2018). Unibs4all: A mobile application for accessible wayfinding and navigation in an urban university campus [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 4th EAI International Conference on Smart Objects and Technologies for Social Good. Barbosa, J., Tavares, J., Cardoso, I., Alves, B., & Martini, B. (2018). TrailCare: An indoor and outdoor Context-aware system to assist wheelchair users. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 116, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.04.001 Brewer, R. N., & Kameswaran, V. (2019). Understanding trust, trans- portation, and accessibility through ridesharing [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Brock, A., Truillet, P., Oriola, B., Picard, D., & Jouffrais, C. (2012). Design and user satisfaction of interactive maps for visually impaired people [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the International Conference on Computers for Handicapped Persons. Budrionis, A., Plikynas, D., Daniu~sis, P., & Indrulionis, A. (2020). Smartphone-based computer vision travelling aids for blind and visually impaired individuals: A systematic review. Assistive Technology, 34(2), 178–194. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2020. 1743381 CDC. (2020). Disability impacts all of us. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/ disabilityandhealth/infographic-disability-impacts-all.html Chang, Y.-J., Chen, C.-N., Chou, L.-D., & Wang, T.-Y. (2008). A novel indoor wayfinding system based on passive RFID for individuals with cognitive impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2008 Second International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare. Chang, Y.-J., Chen, Y.-R., Chang, C. Y., & Wang, T.-Y. (2009). Video prompting and indoor wayfinding based on bluetooth beacons: A case study in supported employment for people with severe mental illness [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2009 WRI International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing. Chang, Y.-J., Chu, Y.-Y., Chen, C.-N., & Wang, T.-Y. (2008). Mobile computing for indoor wayfinding based on bluetooth sensors for indi- viduals with cognitive impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper pre- sented at the 2008 3rd International Symposium on Wireless Pervasive Computing. Chang, Y.-J., Peng, S.-M., Wang, T.-Y., Chen, S.-F., Chen, Y.-R., & Chen, H.-C. (2010). Autonomous indoor wayfinding for individuals with cognitive impairments. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 7(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-7-45 Chang, Y.-J., Tsai, S.-K., & Wang, T.-Y. (2008). A context aware hand- held wayfinding system for individuals with cognitive impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 10th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and acces- sibility. https://doi.org/10.1145/1414471.1414479 Chang, Y.-J., & Wang, T.-Y. (2010a). Comparing picture and video prompting in autonomous indoor wayfinding for individuals with cognitive impairments. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 14(8), 737–747. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-010-0285-9 Chang, Y.-J., & Wang, T.-Y. (2010b). Indoor wayfinding based on wireless sensor networks for individuals with multiple special needs. Cybernetics and Systems, 41(4), 317–333. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 01969721003778584 Chatzina, P., & Gavalas, D. (2021). Route planning and navigation aid for blind and visually impaired people [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the the 14th PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments Conference. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453892.3461834 Chaudary, B., Pohjolainen, S., Aziz, S., Arhippainen, L., & Pulli, P. (2021). Teleguidance-based remote navigation assistance for visually impaired and blind people—Usability and user experience. Virtual Reality, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-021-00536-z Chen, H.-E., Lin, Y.-Y., Chen, C.-H., & Wang, I.-F. (2015). BlindNavi: A navigation app for the visually impaired smartphone user [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems. Cheraghi, S. A., Namboodiri, V., & Walker, L. (2017). GuideBeacon: Beacon-based indoor wayfinding for the blind, visually impaired, and disoriented [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom). https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCOM.2017. 7917858 Cheraghi, S. A., Sharma, A., Namboodiri, V., & Arsal, G. (2019). SafeExit4AII: An inclusive indoor emergency evacuation system for people with disabilities [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 16th International Web for All Conference. Comai, S., De Bernardi, E., Masciadri, A., Matteucci, M., Salice, F., & Veronese, F. (2017). ALMA: An Indoor Localization and Navigation System for the Elderly [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the International Conference on Smart Objects and Technologies for Social Good. Constantinescu, A., Petrausch, V., Mu€ller, K., & Stiefelhagen, R. (2019). Towards a standardized grammar for navigation systems for persons with visual impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. https://doi.org/10.1145/3308561.3354618 Coughlan, J., & Manduchi, R. (2009). A mobile phone wayfinding sys- tem for visually impaired users. Assistive Technology Research Series, 25(2009), 849. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-60750-042-1-849 Ding, D., Parmanto, B., Karimi, H. A., Roongpiboonsopit, D., Pramana, G., Conahan, T., & Kasemsuppakorn, P. (2007). Design considerations for a personalized wheelchair navigation system [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2007 29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353411 Eskicioglu, O. C., Ozer, M. S., Rocha, T., & Barroso, J. (2020). Safe and Sound Mobile Application: A solution for aid people with visual dis- abilities' mobility [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 9th International Conference on Software Development and Technologies for Enhancing Accessibility and Fighting Info- exclusion. https://doi.org/10.1145/3439231.3440616 Fickas, S., Sohlberg, M., & Hung, P.-F. (2008). Route-following assist- ance for travelers with cognitive impairments: A comparison of four prompt modes. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(12), 876–888. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2008.07.006 Firmino, E., & Te'ofilo, M. (2013). Visually impaired navigation assist- ant for emerging market using tactile floor, feature phone and audio descriptions [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 4th Annual Symposium on Computing for Development. https://doi.org/10.1145/2537052.2537072 Gallagher, T., Wise, E., Yam, H. C., Li, B., Ramsey-Stewart, E., Dempster, A. G., & Rizos, C. (2014). Indoor navigation for people who are blind or vision impaired: Where are we and where are we going? Journal of Location Based Services, 8(1), 54–73. https://doi. org/10.1080/17489725.2014.895062 Ganz, A., Schafer, J. M., Tao, Y., Wilson, C., & Robertson, M. (2014). PERCEPT-II: Smartphone based indoor navigation system for the blind [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2014 36th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society. Garc'ıa-Catal'a, M., Rodr'ıguez-S'anchez, M., & Mart'ın-Barroso, E. (2020). Survey of indoor location technologies and wayfinding sys- tems for users with cognitive disabilities in emergencies. Behaviour & Information Technology, 41(4), 879–903. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 0144929X.2020.1849404 Garc'ıa de Marina, A. G., Carro, R. M., & Haya, P. (2012). Where should I go? Guiding users with cognitive limitations through mobile devices outdoors [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 13th international conference on interaccio'n per- sona-ordenador. Giudice, N. A., Whalen, W. E., Riehle, T. H., Anderson, S. M., & Doore, S. A. (2019). Evaluation of an accessible, real-time, and infra- structure-free indoor navigation system by users who are blind in 22 M. ZAHABI ET AL. the mall of america. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 113(2), 140–155. https://doi.org/10.1177/0145482X19840918 Gomez, J., & Montoro, G. (2015). Design Considerations and Evaluation Methodology for Adapted Navigational Assistants for People with Cognitive Disabilities [Paper presentation]. Paper pre- sented at the HEALTHINF. Gomez, J., Montoro, G., Torrado, J. C., & Plaza, A. (2015). An adapted wayfinding system for pedestrians with cognitive disabilities. Mobile Information Systems, 2015, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/ 520572 Griffin, E., Picinali, L., & Scase, M. (2020). The effectiveness of an interactive audio-tactile map for the process of cognitive mapping and recall among people with visual impairments. Brain and Behavior, 10(7), e01650. https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.1650 Guerreiro, J., Ahmetovic, D., Sato, D., Kitani, K., & Asakawa, C. (2019). Airport accessibility and navigation assistance for people with visual impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Gupta, M., Abdolrahmani, A., Edwards, E., Cortez, M., Tumang, A., Majali, Y., Lazaga, M., Tarra, S., Patil, P., & Kuber, R. (2020). Towards More Universal Wayfinding Technologies: Navigation Preferences Across Disabilities [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376581 Guy, R., & Truong, K. (2012). CrossingGuard: Exploring information content in navigation aids for visually impaired pedestrians [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Hara, K., Azenkot, S., Campbell, M., Bennett, C. L., Le, V., Pannella, S., Moore, R., Minckler, K., Ng, R. H., & Froehlich, J. E. (2015). Improving public transit accessibility for blind riders by crowdsourc- ing bus stop landmark locations with google street view: An extended analysis. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, 6(2), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/2717513 Harriehausen-Muhlabauter, B. (2014). Mobile Navigation for Limited Mobility Users [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the International Conference on Digital Human Modeling and Applications in Health, Safety, Ergonomics and Risk Management. Harriehausen-Mu€hlbauer, B. (2016). Communicating with Wheelscout via voice: Speech technology in a mobile navigation app computing barrier-free routes [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2016 Future Technologies Conference (FTC). Herv'as, R., Bravo, J., & Fontecha, J. (2014). An assistive navigation sys- tem based on augmented reality and context awareness for people with mild cognitive impairments. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 18(1), 368–374. https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI. 2013.2266480 Ivanov, R. (2010). Indoor navigation system for visually impaired [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer Systems and Technologies and Workshop for PhD Students in Computing on International Conference on Computer Systems and Technologies. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/1839379.1839405 Jafari, F. (2019). Technology-Assisted navigation in public spaces for hard of hearing people. Syracuse University. Jain, D. (2014a). Path-guided indoor navigation for the visually impaired using minimal building retrofitting [Paper presentation]. Paper pre- sented at the Proceedings of the 16th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers & accessibility. https://doi. org/10.1145/2661334.2661359 Jain, D. (2014b). Pilot evaluation of a path-guided indoor navigation system for visually impaired in a public museum [Paper presenta- tion]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 16th International ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers & accessibility. https:// doi.org/10.1145/2661334.2661405 Jain, D., Jain, A., Paul, R., Komarika, A., & Balakrishnan, M. (2013). A path-guided audio based indoor navigation system for persons with visual impairment [Paper presentation]. Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. https://doi.org/10.1145/2513383. 2513410 Jian, C., Shi, H., Schafmeister, F., Rachuy, C., Sasse, N., Schmidt, H., Hoemberg, V., & von Steinbu€chel, N. (2012). Touch and speech: Multimodal interaction for elderly persons [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies. Kacorri, H., Mascetti, S., Gerino, A., Ahmetovic, D., Alampi, V., Takagi, H., & Asakawa, C. (2018). Insights on assistive orientation and mobility of people with visual impairment based on large-scale longitudinal data. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, 11(1), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3178853 Kahraman, M., & Turhan, C. (2021). An intelligent indoor guidance and navigation system for the visually impaired. Assistive Technology, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2021.1872738 Karimi, H. A., Zhang, L., & Benner, J. G. (2013). Personalized accessi- bility maps (PAMs) for communities with special needs [Paper presentation].Paper presented at the International Symposium on Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems,. Karimi, H. A., Zhang, L., & Benner, J. G. (2014). Personalized accessi- bility map (PAM): A novel assisted wayfinding approach for people with disabilities. Annals of GIS, 20(2), 99–108. https://doi.org/10. 1080/19475683.2014.904438 Kasemsuppakorn, P., Karimi, H. A., Ding, D., & Ojeda, M. A. (2015). Understanding route choices for wheelchair navigation. Disability and Rehabilitation, 10(3), 198–210. Khan, S., Nazir, S., & Khan, H. U. (2021). Analysis of navigation assis- tants for blind and visually impaired people: A systematic review. IEEE Access, 9, 26712–26734. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021. 3052415 Kim, J.-E., Bessho, M., Kobayashi, S., Koshizuka, N., & Sakamura, K. (2016). Navigating visually impaired travelers in a large train station using smartphone and bluetooth low energy [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851613. 2851716 Kim, J.-E., Bessho, M., Koshizuka, N., & Sakamura, K. (2014). Mobile applications for assisting mobility for the visually impaired using IoT infrastructure [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 2014 TRON Symposium (TRONSHOW). Krainz, E., Lind, V., Moser, W., & Dornhofer, M. (2016). Accessible way finding on mobile devices for different user groups [Paper presen- tation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct. Kuriakose, B., Shrestha, R., & Sandnes, F. E. (2020). Tools and technol- ogies for blind and visually impaired navigation support: A review. IETE Technical Review, 39(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 02564602.2020.1819893 Lewis, L., Sharples, S., Chandler, E., & Worsfold, J. (2015). Hearing the way: Requirements and preferences for technology-supported navi- gation aids. Applied Ergonomics, 48, 56–69. Li, Q., & Luximon, Y. (2020). Older adults' use of mobile device: Usability challenges while navigating various interfaces. Behaviour & Information Technology, 39(8), 837–861. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 0144929X.2019.1622786 Liu, A. L., Hile, H., Borriello, G., Brown, P. A., Harniss, M., Kautz, H., & Johnson, K. (2009). Customizing directions in an automated way- finding system for individuals with cognitive impairment [Paper pres- entation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 11th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers and accessibility. https://doi.org/10.1145/1639642.1639649 Liu, A. L., Hile, H., Kautz, H., Borriello, G., Brown, P. A., Harniss, M., & Johnson, K. (2008). Indoor wayfinding: Developing a functional interface for individuals with cognitive impairments. Disability and Rehabilitation, 3(1), 69–81. Long, S. K., Karpinsky, N. D., Do€ner, H., & Still, J. D. (2016). Using a mobile application to help visually impaired individuals explore the outdoors Advances in design for inclusion (pp. 213–223). Springer. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION 23 Mengue-Topio, H., Courbois, Y., Farran, E. K., & Sockeel, P. (2011). Route learning and shortcut performance in adults with intellectual disability: A study with virtual environments. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 32(1), 345–352. Menkens, C., Sussmann, J., Al-Ali, M., Breitsameter, E., Frtunik, J., Nendel, T., & Schneiderbauer, T. (2011). EasyWheel-A mobile social navigation and support system for wheelchair users [Paper presenta- tion]. Paper presented at the 2011 Eighth International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations. Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & Group, P. (2009). Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. PLoS Medicine, 6(7), e1000097. https://doi. org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097 Molich, R., & Nielsen, J. (1990). Improving a human-computer dia- logue. Communications of the ACM, 33(3), 338–348. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/77481.77486 Moreno, M., Shahrabadi, S., Jos'e, J., du Buf, J. H., & Rodrigues, J. M. (2012). Realtime local navigation for the blind: Detection of lateral doors and sound interface. Procedia Computer Science, 14, 74–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2012.10.009 Nair, V., Olmschenk, G., Seiple, W. H., & Zhu, Z. (2020). ASSIST: Evaluating the usability and performance of an indoor navigation assistant for blind and visually impaired people. Assistive Technology, 34(3), 289–299. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2020. 1809553 Nielsen, J. (1994). Enhancing the explanatory power of usability heuris- tics [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/191666.191729 Nielsen, J. (1996). Accessible design for users with disabilities. Retrieved from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/accessible-design- for-users-with-disabilities/ Paladugu, A., Chandakkar, P. S., Zhang, P., & Li, B. (2013). Supporting navigation of outdoor shopping complexes for visuallyimpaired users through multi-modal data fusion [Paper presentation]. Paper pre- sented at the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2013.6607564 Patch, K., Spellman, J., & Wahlbin, K. (2015). Mobile accessibility: How Wcag 2.0 and Other w3c/wai guidelines apply to mobile. Retrieved from https://www.w3.org/TR/mobile-accessibility-mapping/ Pr'emont, M.-E'., Vincent, C., Mostafavi, M. A., & Routhier, F. (2020). Geospatial assistive technologies for wheelchair users: A scoping review of usability measures and criteria for mobile user interfaces and their potential applicability. Disability and Rehabilitation, 15(2), 119–131. https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2018.1539876 Prerana, V., Tejaswini, S., Manandhar, J., Santhosh, T., Pushpa, S., & Manjunath, T. (2019). STAVI: Smart Travelling Application for the Visually Impaired. [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2019 International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCES45898.2019.9002238 Rodriguez-Sanchez, M., Moreno-Alvarez, M., Mart'ın, E., Borromeo, S., & Hernandez-Tamames, J. (2014). Accessible smartphones for blind users: A case study for a wayfinding system. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(16), 7210–7222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.05.031 Rodriguez-S'anchez, M. C., & Martinez-Romo, J. (2017). GAWA–Manager for accessibility Wayfinding apps. International Journal of Information Management, 37(6), 505–519. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.05.011 Ryu, H.-G., Kim, T., & Li, K.-J. (2014). Indoor navigation map for visu- ally impaired people [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Indoor Spatial Awareness. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2676528.2676533 Sato, D., Oh, U., Guerreiro, J., Ahmetovic, D., Naito, K., Takagi, H., Kitani, K. M., & Asakawa, C. (2019). NavCog3 in the wild: Large- scale blind indoor navigation assistant with semantic features. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, 12(3), 1–30. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3340319 Shahini, F., Nasr, V., & Zahabi, M. (Under review). A Friendly Indoor Navigation App for People with Disabilities (FIND) [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. Sili, M., Gira, M., & Mayer, C. (2017). Usability matters [Paper presen- tation]. Paper presented at the International Conference on Human- Computer Interaction. Somyat, N., Wongsansukjaroen, T., Longjaroen, W., & Nakariyakul, S. (2018). NavTU: Android navigation app for Thai people with visual impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the 2018 10th International Conference on Knowledge and Smart Technology (KST). https://doi.org/10.1109/KST.2018.8426068 Stent, A. J., Azenkot, S., & Stern, B. (2010). Iwalk: A lightweight naviga- tion system for low-vision users [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS con- ference on Computers and accessibility. Stevens, A. C., Carroll, D. D., Courtney-Long, E. A., Zhang, Q. C., Sloan, M. L., Griffin-Blake, S., & Peacock, G. (2016). Adults with one or more functional disabilities—United States, 2011–2014. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65(38), 1021–1025. https:// doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6538a1 Stock, S. E., Davies, D. K., Wehmeyer, M. L., & Lachapelle, Y. (2011). Emerging new practices in technology to support independent com- munity access for people with intellectual and cognitive disabilities. NeuroRehabilitation, 28(3), 261–269. Strain, M. (2015). 1983 to today: A history of mobile apps. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/13/his- tory-mobile-apps-future-interactive-timeline WHO. (2020). Disability and health. Retrieved from. https://www.who. int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/disability-and-health Williams, M. A., Hurst, A., & Kane, S. K. (2013). "Pray before you step out" describing personal and situational blind navigation behaviors [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. Yang, R., Park, S., Mishra, S. R., Hong, Z., Newsom, C., Joo, H., Hofer, E., & Newman, M. W. (2011). Supporting spatial awareness and independent wayfinding for pedestrians with visual impairments [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the the proceedings of the 13th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility. https://doi.org/10.1145/2049536.2049544 Yu, J. E., & Chattopadhyay, D. (2020). Maps are hard for me": Identifying How Older Adults Struggle with Mobile Maps [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the the 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. https:// doi.org/10.1145/3373625.3416997 Zheng, X., Maredia, A., & Zahabi, M. (2021). A Scoping Review and Content Analysis of Navigation Apps for Blind and Visually Impaired Users [Paper presentation]. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Baltimore, MA. About the Authors Maryam Zahabi is an assistant professor of industrial and systems engineering at Texas A&M University and directs the Human-Systems Interaction (HSI) Laboratory. She received her PhD in Industrial and Systems Engineering from North Carolina State University in 2017. Xi Zheng is a product manager at Wyze. She received her PhD in Industrial and Systems Engineering from University at Buffalo in 2020 and worked as a post-doctoral researcher in the HSI laboratory at Texas A&M University in 2021. Azima Maredia is an interdisciplinary engineer. She worked in the HSI lab as an undergraduate student and received her B.S. from Texas A&M University in 2021. Farzaneh Shahini is a PhD student in industrial and systems engineer- ing at Texas A&M University. She received her M.S. in industrial and systems engineering from Texas A&M University in 2021.