669 THE JOURNAL OF SOCIAL POLICY STUDIES ЖУРНАЛ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ СОЦИАЛЬНОЙ ПОЛИТИКИ Viktor Sinitsyn, Oksana Zaporozhets ORIENTATION PRACTICES AND INDEPENDENT MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE WITH BLINDNESS IN THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT Translated to English via Google Translate, July 6, 2023 In 2021, it will be ten years since the launch of the Accessible Environment federal program. Following the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, ratified a few years earlier, the program was the first large-scale attempt to overcome the alienating effect of public spaces in Russian cities. To date, elements of inclusive design of residential buildings and public spaces have become the norm of urban planning practice. However, the accessibility of Russian cities is assessed ambiguously. While official reporting indicates an increase in the share of accessible facilities, expert assessments (including assessments of the disabled themselves) express concern about the lack of clear positive changes. The article reveals a number of grounds for such a discrepancy. Using the theoretical resources of phenomenology and ethnomethodology, we turn to the analysis of the daily movements of blind citizens, describing the features of their orientation and navigation, as well as the barriers that impede their independent movement. The orientation of blind citizens is based on the selection, mapping and situational verification by them of the most stable landmarks of the route with the help of tactile, vestibular, light, olfactory, Independent movement of the blind around the city is hampered by the lack of the required number of landmarks (due to the variability of the city or unforeseen) or Viktor Vadimovich Sinitsyn – Master of Social Sciences, Intern Researcher, Scientific and Educational Laboratory for Urban Social Research, National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. Email: victor. sinitsyn@gmail.com Oksana Nikolaevna Zaporozhets - Candidate of Sociology. in Economics, Associate Professor, Faculty of Urban and Regional Development, National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia. E-mail: ozaporozhets@hse.ru erroneous interpretation of such signs, due to structural or situational. An obstacle to the movement of the blind in the city is not only the state of the urban environment, but also the fears associated with the risks of entering the city, as well as incompetent assistance, interference in the navigation process or opposition from other citizens. The conducted research shows that the program "Accessible Environment" focuses mainly on changing the urban materiality, however, the independence of the development of the city by the blind is associated with a large number of prerequisites, including the ability to reliably interpret the environment, communicate with other citizens, as well as the attitudes of the blind towards others and the urban environment. In conclusion, we propose a number of measures to optimize ongoing urban change programs. Keywords: blind, disability, urban environment, city, orientation, accessibility, phenomenology, qualitative sociology DOI: 10.17323/727-0634-2021-19-4-669-684 According to international studies, blind people leave their homes much less often compared to people with intact vision (Neuschmid et al. 2014). Despite the lack of comparable data, it can be assumed that this situation is typical for Russia as well. The question of the orientation of blind people is especially acute in large cities - with their vast spaces, complex routes, large of urban life. The difficulty of the movement of blind people around the city, among other things, is associated with its oculocentricity - the dominance of visuality in the system of city landmarks. Describing the formation of modern cities, analysts have noted (Sennet 2016) that the subordination of urban planning to a geometric perspective and the increase in the scale of the city has led to the fact that visual signs have become the dominant way of marking and orienting the modern metropolis. In addition, competition for tourist flows, investments and loyalty of residents has actualized the importance of a positive and recognizable image of the city, created both by urban representations and elements of the urban environment, for example, by the aesthetics of urban public spaces (Kalyukin et al. 2015). Given the ever-increasing importance of visuality in the organization of urban life, modern megacities are a relatively unfavorable environment for blind people. Since the 1970s The negative impact of the urban environment on those whose bodily organization or sensory perception is significantly different from the conventionally "healthy" person is recognized and actively criticized by the disability rights movements in the UK and the USA. United under the slogan "Nothing for us without us," disabled people and political activists spoke out against the prevailing pattern of medical, environmental, and cultural oppression (Charlton 1998). Subsequently, the joint efforts of people with disabilities, scientists and politicians led to the recognition of the need and the development of social and environmental inclusion programs, including significant changes in urban space (Goodley 2017; Ferguson, Nusbaum 2012). In Russia, the change in the urban environment is associated with the signing of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2008. The Accessible Environment federal program launched in 2011 was the first experience of applying the basic provisions of the Convention in practice (Yarskaya-Smirnova, Romanov 2010). Despite the fact that 2021 marks ten years since the launch of the program for adapting urban space to the needs of people with disabilities, its results are ambiguous. While official reports indicate an increase in the number of accessible urban facilities, expert assessments, including assessments by researchers and the disabled themselves, record the absence of significant changes and contain criticism of existing programs (Stalingulag 2019; Wylsacom 2018; Phillips 2018; DEPiR of Moscow 2018 ; Klepikova 2015; Naberushkina 2011). Based on an analysis of the daily movements of blind citizens, we find out the reasons for the ambiguous assessment of the measures being implemented. Describing the specifics of the orientation of blind people using the theoretical resources of phenomenology and ethnomethodology, we identify the skills of a blind person and the characteristics of the environment that ensure his independent movement around the city. Analyzing the situations identified by informants as problematic, we single out the characteristics of the environment and practices that hinder their independent mobility. We believe that the orientation of a blind person in an urban environment is multisensory and occurs in constant interaction with urban material objects and with other people. Orientation is based on certain physical capabilities of recognition by blind people, their attitudes towards the city and citizens, a set of fixed landmarks, and the assumption of the variability of the urban environment. It is the interactive and situational nature of the orientation and movement of blind citizens that today is not taken into account by programs for changing the urban environment. In conclusion, we propose ways to overcome the existing program limitations, based on the methods of orientation and movement of blind citizens identified in the study. Orientation of a blind person in the city: A phenomenological and ethnomethodological perspective (In)accessibility of the city in urban studies is traditionally described using the concept of "right to the city" (Harvey 2008; Mitchell 2003). Allowing one to identify the conflicting parties - those who appropriate the right to use the urban environment, and those who are deprived of such an opportunity - this approach does not offer a conceptual apparatus for describing the individual experience of constructing the accessibility of the environment that underlies the confrontation. Thus, in the study, we needed to use a microanalytical, "concretizing" framework of phenomenology and ethnomethodology (Korbut 2018: 15). The starting point of our analysis will be the body of a blind person moving in an urban environment. Following Maurice Merleau-Ponty, we define the body as the "axis of the world", the basis of any feeling and awareness, an instrument of interaction with the world (Merleau-Ponty 1999:321). Such an understanding takes the body beyond the boundaries of the flesh, allowing for the presence of sentient extensions, one of which is the cane of a blind man. In Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology, the materiality of the body is important, defined as "the thing in which I live" (ibid.: 88). It is she who allows a person to establish a connection with other things (objects and people) and form a "phenomenal field" - a situationally limited area around the body, in which objects and phenomena given in sensory experience are found (ibid.: 95). The objects and people found in the phenomenal field have a meaning in the context of the practice being carried out, woven into the system of relations between the individual, his action and other things and people. Thus, objects and people that appear in the phenomenal field of a moving person are able to signal the correctness of their actions. In this sense, they are, according to Harold Garfinkel's terminology, "oriented objects" (Garfinkel 2002: 179–181). Failure to relate the object to the practice, or the lack of a sufficient number of oriented objects, results in a disruption in the performance of the practice. Such local violations will be considered by us as problematic situations that determine the inaccessibility of urban space. Note that, as empirical analysis will show, oriented objects are not necessarily material Despite the fact that the orientation is purely situational in nature, it is associated with the preparation and use of discursive artifacts (maps or plans) that accompany and partially predetermine practice. Such plans are "resources of situational action", constantly accompanying it, but not completely predetermining (Suchman 2019: 122). The stated frame does not imply the presence of strict operationalization, being rather a framework for describing a bodily embodied and situationally ordered practice. The concepts we use play the role of "sensitizing concepts" (sensitizing concepts), stimulating- that provide empirical sensitivity and set the general direction of analysis, rather than predefining the phenomenon under study in the form of "clear definitions in terms of attributes or fixed benchmarks" (Blumer 1954: 7). Maintaining conceptual flexibility is important due to limited information about the movements and orientation of blind people in large cities, including Russian ones. Orientation practices of blind people in urban space The article is based on a study conducted in 2020–2021, which included ten interviews with blind people aged 22 to 64, three of whom were men and seven were women. Each of the informants had a long history of vision loss (minimum 19 years). The "blind" in this study were understood as people with visual acuity up to 6%, which corresponded to the second group of disability. This criterion was developed in the course of conversations with informants, who defined such visual acuity as the limit of the ability to rely on it when moving around the city. All informants had experience of orientation and navigation within Moscow for at least the last four years. The main data collection method was semi-structured interviews. The choice of interviews allowed us to remain flexible and obtain information about route development practices, including appeals to plans, and reflection on the general problematic nature of urban experience. It should be recognized that the lack of observation of practices typical of the ethnomethodological approach imposes restrictions on the completeness and detail of the description of orientation practices. All names used in the text are pseudonyms. Orientation, as a process in which blind urbanites engage different skills and combine multiple activities, is rarely the subject of study (Williams et al. 2013). The main focus of analysts is on specific modes of locomotion, such as locomotion with GPS (Kuriakose et al. 2020), with a guide dog (Lloyd et al. 2008; Craigon et al. 2017) or with an ultrasonic cane (Sen et al. 2018). Such an analytical choice shifts attention to assistive technologies or animal assistants, thereby reducing the agency of blind citizens. Focusing in our article on the bodily experience of orientation of blind citizens, we would like to emphasize their agency, understood as the ability to independently navigate and move in the urban environment, build routes, develop and combine ways of moving around the city. The agency of blind citizens is not a constant: it is developed in everyday practices and interactions with other citizens and institutions, which can either strengthen or weaken or deprive it. Talking about their daily routes, informants mentioned various orientation skills related to reading and modeling space using tactile, vestibular and sound sensitivity, light perception, smell and intuition, which they learned independently or with the help of specialists, often in special institutions. The first way of orientation in the city is tactile reading of space, when a blind person touches the surrounding objects with a special cane or body parts and uses this information to make a route. Using a cane, a blind person makes progressive movements, outlining the space in front of him - with or without separation of the cane from the surface, depending on the mobility of the tip. Informants described this method of using a cane as conventionally correct, as it is taught in specialized courses on orientation in space. However, the actual practice of using a cane may vary, since often special training is not available and blind citizens learn to use a cane on their own. So, one of the informants recalled that at first she sometimes led the cane not in front of herself, but behind herself, while not making forward movements, but simply following the line of the curb: I also had runs in a straight line, from one store to another - the cane led not in front, but behind, this is certainly not a very correct run, but ... to run in a straight line, I liked it ... I ran along the curb, respectively, the cane was near the curb, and I ran ahead and could control the trajectory along the curb (Anastasia). The cane allows the blind to feel the boundary between different parts of the street – for example, between a pedestrian and a carriageway, or between a sidewalk and a lawn. The boundary can be defined through the difference in height of different parts of the road or through the difference in coverage, that gives different background vibration to the cane: Usually they are located as they are - some kind of path, and, for example, a lawn on the right. And you just walk along the path, well, as I do, I just use a cane to go on the lawn, then off it. A little, here and there. The same for the curb (Egor). Understanding the boundaries between parts of the street creates an idea of the perspective and changes in direction of the street. In addition to background differences in vibration, the cane allows you to distinguish between objects that are in the path of the walker. Distinguishing an object is associated with a sharp change in the background level of vibration - its interruption by a sharp blow, or the disappearance of vibration due to a collision with "We are orienting ourselves, here, some kind of trash can, crashed into it, that's wonderful, which means that after some time you have to turn... or the posts that keep cars from entering the sidewalks. This is very convenient." (Gennady). Such a collision with an object serves as a sign for changing the trajectory of movement and correcting the route, or for local correction within a given trajectory: You walk, you walk, once you come across a car, then you walk, you have a section where the door in the store is wide open, at which there are trucks all the time, which load products, and you go and crash into this door or truck. You need to get around it (Maria). Similarly, smaller objects, usually located in enclosed spaces and perceived with the help of hand touches, are built into the practice of tactile orientation. For example, signs made in Braille or other elements. Thus, describing the routes inside the university, one of the informants spoke about the board with ads attached to it as a landmark on the way to the audience: "On the fourth floor, to get to the teacher's room, you can touch the nails that hang there with pieces of paper" (Anastasia). The second way of orientation in space is vestibular sensitivity. Vestibular landmarks consist of a blind person's reflection of his sensations caused by a change in direction, a slope of a surface, or sudden changes in altitude. So, a sign of the end of the route can be a recess in the sidewalk noticed by the informant: "Then, when the curb ended, there was such a small depression that I felt with my feet, ran back" (Anastasia). Vestibular landmarks can indicate both the correctness and the fallacy of the direction in which a blind person moves. For example, the increased distance between the platform and the exit from the train car means that the informant missed the station he needed. The third way of orienting in space is associated with a skill called "echolocation" by the informants. Echolocation involves sensitivity to the auditory environment of the city. Using it, blind people form an idea of the surrounding space, based on the location and specifics of the sounds heard in it. Blind citizens can focus both on the special auditory background inherent in certain locations, for example, road noise or the hum of a power plant, and on individual sounds, including auditory traffic signals created as part of the city adaptation program. In particular, various musical genres playing in the shops located along the way can serve as a guide: "Music plays in the Central Department Store, there is usually some kind of jazz, and then some shops, there is usually classical music, most often Tchaikovsky played" (Gennady). Orienting background characteristics include the difference in acoustics in different rooms or between a room and an open space. Echolocation is proving to be a particularly useful tool for assessing perspective and direction of movement. Compared to other modalities, such as tactile, hearing allows blind pedestrians to navigate large distances. Streams of people and cars moving parallel to the walking blind inevitably leave an auditory trace that follows the contours, directions and turns of streets and other routes. Thus, the coming turn can be heard faster by the sound of passing and turning cars, or people passing by, than it can be felt with a cane. In addition to the sounds that the environment is filled with, reflection of the sound made by the walker himself can be orienting. This way of orientation is especially effective in closed spaces, replacing tactile orientation: I can snap my fingers and a small picture is reflected in me - here is a parked car, if there are bushes nearby - I will understand too, if there is a fence nearby - I will understand this too ... from the age of 5, my mother and I began to name the surrounding objects, and my mother thought that we see. But, of course, this is impossible, and the doctors said that it could not be ... We went for a walk, my mother said, let's see what's nearby - and my sister and I named objects ... Even when I went to a music school - I went there very quickly oriented and walked without a cane (Maria). Finally, the manifestations of the light and olfactory landscape and "intuition" are the landmarks for the blind. Smells and sunlight are not very informative in the process of orientation, but they can be useful, for example, indicating an obstacle in the way of a blind person: "I see, for example, that something is worth it, but I don't see it as a person or a pillar, I see that there is a shadow and I need to get around it" (Catherine). Blind people with residual vision may notice markings in the form of yellow lines indicating the first step, or yellow circles on glass doors. Similarly, familiar or, conversely, atypical smells can signal the correct direction. Several informants mentioned a poorly defined, but important for them way of orientation – intuition, or "sixth sense" (Gennady). Speaking about it, the informants described the ability to determine the presence of objects on the way without explainable and understandable incentives for the walker himself: "The blind sometimes feel the obstacles incomprehensibly, it seems that something is standing in front of you, and you are touching it with a stick, something is really worth it" (Gennady). The practice of mastering the route is associated with memorizing or "mapping" the most stable objects of the environment and their situational verification by alternately including the mentioned skills. At the same time, independent urban navigation of a blind person is seriously limited. First of all, the first development of the route, as a rule, does not occur independently. In order to map the route, a blind person needs to pass the chosen road several times, accompanied by a person with intact vision, or with a blind The need to repeat the experience is associated with the gradual development of objects that can become oriented. A walking person needs time to identify orienting objects, to understand their location in space and their relationship with each other. However, even with a detailed understanding of the route and the objects that help in its passage, a blind person is faced with the fact that the configuration of objects on the route Orientation problems: Unpredictability or insufficiency of the environment and "blind fears" Despite the many ways of orientation used by blind people, the independence of their movement around the city is seriously limited by the difficulties that arise in the process of movement. These include the impossibility of correct interpretation or the error of interpretation of surrounding objects, interference in the process of navigation of other citizens and fears associated with the risks of going out into the city and communication with sighted people. The impossibility of correct interpretation of objects manifests itself in situations where the objects of the urban environment are located or constructed in such a way that they cannot be detected or distinguished in the phenomenal field of a blind person. Such objects include the names of stops and numbers of public transport, which in a modern city are presented exclusively visually. Particularly problematic in this case are busy transport hubs, for example, railway stations: I feel like I'm locked up approximately within the Moscow Ring Road, because the story of navigating suburban trains ... It's one thing to get into a car at an ordinary station, where there are only two platforms - back and forth. And it's another matter from the same Yaroslavsky railway station, where there are 15 tracks and ten platforms, to find the right platform, the right way and take the train, despite the fact that further branches still diverge there ... I don't know (Ilya). For the same reason, it is problematic for a blind city dweller to find validators to pay for fares that do not have a unified seat in the cabin, or to find the right exit from underground passages. Failure to identify the desired object can turn into a threat to the life of a blind person. For example, wear or lack of a tactile line separating the subway platform from the rail is fraught with a fall: There were no these stripes, and I flew off onto the rails ... some guys there gave me a hand, they, in my opinion, were more scared than me ... But when I got on the train, I felt horror, but on the other hand, some kind of thirst for life, you know how life returns - you physically feel (Gennady). The impossibility of interpreting the object by blind citizens may be due to the excessive sensory saturation of the environment, which turns it into an indistinguishable rumble. For example, the noise of many cars at busy intersections or poorly laid guide tactile tiles: Here is this yellow embossed canoe, many of us do not like it ... Despite the fact that there are standards for its laying, these strips should guide where to go, they are laid at random so that they stick out too much, and the cane just sticks into them (Ilya). The second orientation difficulty is an erroneous interpretation, which is based on the partial inaccessibility of the object for perception or unreliable information received from the environment. An example of an erroneous interpretation would be a blind person colliding with an object that differs in Misinterpretation error occurs when the city's guiding infrastructure fails, as happens when public transport are misleading. The third difficulty is related to the interference of outsiders in the process of orientation of a blind city dweller. Such interference may concern an individual or the device of some fragment of the urban environment. In the first case, the blind person has to deal with the inappropriate attitude of passers-by - with inappropriate help or dangerous behavior. For example, informants told us about situations when strangers tried to change their route without asking: "People sometimes overdo it and lead without asking where, I'm already used to it ... Of course, this always impresses me a little, but if you are already being carried, you don't really protest, because you are afraid that you will be dropped" (Elizabeth). Threats and attempts to rob a blind person, or, conversely, excessive concern, manifested in the desire to give alms, are also examples of inappropriate attitude. In the second case, the intervention that complicates the orientation of a blind person concerns changes in individual components of the urban environment. In particular, in one of the interviews, they talked about the dismantling of a traffic light with an audible signal, which was caused by a collective complaint of the residents of the area about the sound disturbing them. The collision of blind people in their daily movement around the city with many problems leads to the development of fears that prevent access to the city and its development. The totality of such fears, or, as one of the informants called them "blind fears," can make it difficult or even stop blind people from trying to go to the city on their own. In addition to the blind themselves, those who care for them, such as relatives or teachers in boarding schools, who seek to protect their wards from independent movements, are subject to the same fears. As the informants themselves noted, such fears are especially strong in the absence of personal experience of going to the city and communicating with sighted people outside the family or special educational institutions. Conclusion Let us return to the problem, formulated at the beginning of the work, of the limited effectiveness of measures to adapt the urban environment. Despite the fact that the adoption of appropriate measures is an important step in the struggle for the rights of people with disabilities, they are not a guarantee of creating an environment that meets the needs of blind citizens. First, additional landmarks introduced as part of the adaptation of the urban environment are often subject to the logic of the perception of space by a sighted person and are not available to blind people without outside help, which reproduces the oculocentric logic of the organization of urban life. A vivid example of a lack of understanding of the peculiarities of the perception of the city by blind people is the bus depot, the availability of which, according to official reports, is 94%. However, none of the buses in Moscow are equipped with any way of indicating the route number accessible from outside the bus, other than an information board (DEPiR 2018: 44). It is also impossible for blind people without intermediaries to use the infrastructure opportunities specially created for them, for example, separate places for the blind with guide dogs allocated in some buses. Such places are marked only with a sticker that a blind passenger will not be able to find without assistance. Secondly, the quality of the implementation of the declared measures in some cases differs from that declared by the city authorities, as happens in the case of the appearance of tactile surfaces of inadequate quality or not orienting people in space. Thirdly, the very policy of creating an accessible environment is focused on making sustainable changes - the creation of an appropriate infrastructure (traffic lights with a sound signal, tactile tiles, Braille signs, etc.), however, these facilities may lose their functionality due to the volatility of urban life associated with seasonality, repair work, aging and wear and tear of materials that are hostile the actions of the citizens. Fourth, accessibility programs are based on the notion that change is beneficial to all citizens and is unambiguously supported, which is a misconception. Adaptation of the environment for certain groups may make for example, tactile tiles can make the movement of citizens with luggage or wheelchairs uncomfortable. Along with criticism of the implemented measures, blind citizens highlight positive changes that make it easier for them to navigate the city, such as the creation of mobility support services and traffic lights with an audible signal. However, these measures do not radically change the situation, concentrating in certain urban spaces. The limited measures create a discrete fragmented city in which the same spaces can work both as inclusive and as exclusive. This discrepancy and inconsistency is especially noticeable in public transport, where, on the one hand, an escort service and other conditions are created for the movement of blind citizens, on the other hand, at the level of sign systems (and their renewal), the ability of blind people to self orientation. These shortcomings do not mean the futility of the measures taken, but indicate possible ways to improve them. Measures such as involving blind people in testing and developing recommendations to increase the accessibility of the urban environment, informing blind people about the changes already implemented, increasing the awareness of sighted people about the special needs of blind people, their ability to move independently and ways to help them, could greatly facilitate everyday life. movement of blind citizens. In addition, it is important for blind people to be able to get help in overcoming fears and mistrust of the urban environment and other citizens through the creation of a positive experience of being in the city. References Wylsacom (2018) Как незрячий пользуется iPhone, MacBook и Apple Watch. Доступно по ссылке: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQiN1Hhrxu0 (дата обращения: 21 октября 2021). ДЭПиР г. Москвы (2018) Свободный отчёт о результатах проведения оценки фактического воздействия постановления Правительства Москвы от 16.03.2010 No 219-ПП «О мерах по обеспечению беспрепятственного доступа инвалидов и иных маломобильных граждан к объектам социальной, транспортной и инженерной инфраструктур города Москвы». Доступно по ссылке: https://www.mos.ru/upload/documents/files/3450/Svodniiotchetorezyl- tatahOFVPPM219-PP.pdf (дата обращения: 21 октября 2021). Клепикова А. (2015) Социальные исследования инвалидности на постсоветском прос- транстве. Антропологический форум, (26): 222–244. Мерло-Понти М. (1999) Феноменология восприятия. М.: Ювента. Наберушкина Э. (2011) Город для всех: социологический анализ доступности городского пространства для инвалидов. Журнал социологии и социальной антропологии, 14 (3):119–139. Сачмен Л. (2019) Реконфигурации отношений человек – машина: планы и ситуативные действия. М.: Элементарные формы. Сеннет Р. (2016) Плоть и камень. Тело и город в западной цивилизации. М.: Strelka Press. Сталингулаг (2019) На колёсах с Артемием Лебедевым. По центру Москвы на инвалидной коляске. Доступно по ссылке: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waKndLPoHxk (дата обращения: 21 октября 2021). Филлипс С. (2018) Параллельный мир. А. Курленкова, Е. Носенко-Штейн (ред.) Обратная сторона Луны, или что мы не знаем об инвалидности: теория, репрезентации, практики. М.: МБА: 223–273. Харви Д. (2008) Право на город. Логос, 3 (66): 80–94. Ярская-Смирнова Е., Романов П. (2010) Инвалидность и общество: двадцать лет спустя. Социологические исследования, (9): 50–58. Blumer H. (1954) What is wrong with social theory? American sociological review, 19 (1): 3–10. Charlton J. (1998) Nothing about Us without Us. California: University of California Press. Craigon P., Hobson-West P., England C., Whelan C., Lethbridge E., Asher L. (2017) 'She's a Dog at the End of the Day': Guide Dog Owners' Perspectives on the Behaviour of Their Guide Dog. PLoS ONE, 12(4): e0176018. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176018. Ferguson P., Nusbaum E. (2012) Disability Studies: What is It and What Difference Does It Make? Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 37 (2): 70–80. Garfinkel H. (2002) Ethnomethodology's Program: Working out Durkheim's Aphorism. Lan- ham: Rowman & Littlefield. Goodley D. (2017) Disability Studies: An Interdisciplinary Introduction. London: Sage. Kalyukin A., Borén T., Byerley A. (2015) The Second Generation of Post-Socialist Change: Gorky Park and Public Space in Moscow. Urban Geography, 36 (5): 674–695. Korbut A. (2018) The Social Order and Practical Wisdom of Walking in a Crowd. Sociological Journal, (4): 8–29. Kuriakose B., Shrestha R., Sandnes F.E. (2020) Smartphone Navigation Support for Blind and Visu- ally Impaired People– A Comprehensive Analysis of Potentials and Opportunities. In: M. Antona, C. Stephanidis (eds.) Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Applications and Practice. Cham: Springer:568–583. Lloyd J., Grow S., Stafford K., Budge C. (2008) The Guide Dog as a Mobility Aid Part 1: Per- ceived Effectiveness on Travel Performance. International Journal of Orientation & Mobility, (1): 17–33. Mitchell D. (2003) The Right to the City: Social Justice and the Fight for Public Space. New York: Guilford press. Neuschmid J., Gajevic L., Schrenk M., Wasserburger W. (2014) The Blind's Critical Space and the Role of Modern ICT. In: A. Calcatinge (ed.) Critical Spaces: Contemporary Perspectives in Urban, Spatial and Landscape Studies. Münster: LIT Verlag: 179–203. Sen A., Sen K., Das J. (2018) Ultrasonic Blind Stick for Completely Blind People to Avoid Any Kind of Obstacles. 2018 IEEE SENSORS, New-Delhi, 28 October 2018. (Piscataway: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). Williams M., Hurst A., Kane S. (2013) 'Pray before You Step Out': Describing Personal and Situational Blind Navigation Behaviors. 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS '13), Bellevue, 21 October 2013. Доступно по ссылке: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2513383.2513449 (дата обращения: 21 октября 2021). Viktor Sinitsyn, Oksana Zaporozhets PRACTICES OF ORIENTATION AND INDEPENDENT EVERYDAY MOBILITY OF VISUALLY IMPAIRED URBAN CITIZENS This year will mark the 10th anniversary of the 'Accessible environment' state programme in Russia. Following the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the programme aimed at overcoming the social exclusion of people with disabilities in daily urban life. However, despite broad imple- mentation of measures, the accessibility of Russian cities is evaluated con- troversially. While official reports note the increasing number of accessible objects, experts and people with disabilities express concerns over the lack of significant changes. This article highlights some reasons for this. Using phenomenology and ethnomethodology as an analytical framework, we expose the basic practices of orientation and creating day-to-day routes for visually impaired Muscovites, as well as barriers restricting their independent mobility in an urban environment. According to our research, the orientation of visually impaired citizens is based on the tactile, vestibular, light, olfactory, auditory, or intuitive sensitivities that help them in the selection, mapping and situational verification of the route's most stable landmarks. Independence in accomplish- ing routes is hampered by a lack of accessible landmarks or their own misin- terpretations caused by either structural features or the situational conditions of the environment. In addition to barriers in navigating the city, other issues include the fear of going outdoors and navigating the city as well as the pos- sibility that other citizens will interference their travel. Our study shows that the 'Accessible environment' programme aims to change the city's materiality to make it more navigable for visually impaired people. Meanwhile, their orientation and navigation depend on various skills and conditions, including the ability to interpret the environment, their attitudes towards others and the urban environment, and practices of communication. Key words: visually impaired, disability, accessibility, orientation, city, phenomenology, qualitative sociology DOI: 10.17323/727-0634-2021-19-4-669-684 References Blumer H. (1954) What is Wrong with Social Theory? American sociological review, 19 (1): 3–10. Charlton J. (1998) Nothing about Us without Us. California: University of California Press. Viktor Sinitsyn – MSc in Social sciences, Research Assistant, Laboratory of Urban Sociology, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Email: viktor.sinitsyn@gmail.com Oksana Zaporozhets– Cand. Sci. (Sociol.), Associate Professor, Faculty of Urban and Regional Development, National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Email: ozaporozhets@hse.ru 683 Craigon P., Hobson-West P., England C., Whelan C., Lethbridge E., Asher L. (2017) 'She's a Dog at the End of the Day': Guide Dog Owners' Perspectives on the Behaviour of Their Guide Dog. PLoS ONE, 12 (4): e0176018. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176018. DEPaD of Moscow (2018) Svobodnyy otchet o rezul'tatakh provedeniya otsenki faktich- eskogo vozdeystviya postanovleniya Pravitel'stva Moskvy ot 16.03.2010 No 219-PP 'O mer- akh po obespecheniyu besprepyatstvennogo dostupa invalidov i inykh malomobil'nykh grazhdan k ob"ektam sotsial'noy, transportnoy i inzhenernoy infrastruktur goroda Moskvy' [Free Report on Evaluation of an Actual Impact of Moscow Government's Decree No 219- Pp 'On Measures to Ensure Unhindered Access of Disabled People and Other People with Limited Mobility to Social, Transport and Engineering Infrastructures of the City of Mos- cow']. Available at: https://www.mos.ru/upload/documents/files/3450/Svodniiotchetorezyl- tatahOFVPPM219-PP.pdf (access 21 October 2021). Ferguson P., Nusbaum E. (2012) Disability Studies: What is it and What Difference Does It Make? Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 37 (2): 70–80. Garfinkel H. (2002) Ethnomethodology's Program: Working out Durkheim's Aphorism. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. Goodley D. (2017) Disability Studies: An Interdisciplinary Introduction. London: Sage. Harvey D. (2008) Pravo na gorod [The Right to the City]. Logos, 3 (66): 80–94. Kalyukin A., Borén T., Byerley A. (2015) The Second Generation of Post-Socialist Change: Gorky Park and Public Space in Moscow. Urban Geography, 36 (5): 674–695. Klepikova A. (2015) Sotsial'nye issledovaniya invalidnosti na postsovetskom prostranstve [Social Studies of Disability in Post-Soviet Countries]. Antropologicheskiy forum [Forum for Anthropology and Culture], (26): 222–244. Korbut A. (2018) The Social Order and Practical Wisdom of Walking in a Crowd. Socio- logical Journal, (4): 8–29. Kuriakose B., Shrestha R., Sandnes F. E. (2020) Smartphone Navigation Support for Blind and Visually Impaired People – A Comprehensive Analysis of Potentials and Opportuni- ties. In: M. Antona, C. Stephanidis (eds.) Universal Access in Human-Computer Interac- tion. Applications and Practice. Cham: Springer: 568–583. Lloyd J., Grow S., Stafford K., Budge C. (2008) The Guide Dog as a Mobility Aid Part 1: Perceived Effectiveness on Travel Performance. International Journal of Orientation & Mobility, (1): 17–33. Merlau-Ponty M. (1999) Fenomenologiya vospriyatiya [Phenomenology of Perception]. Moscow: Uwenta. Mitchell D. (2003) The Right to the City: Social Justice and the Fight for Public Space. New York: Guilford press. Naberushkina E. (2011) Gorod dlya vsekh: sotsiologicheskiy analiz dostupnosti gorodskogo prostranstva dlya invalidov [A City for Everyone: Sociological Analysis of the Accessibility of Urban Environment for People with Disabilities]. Zhurnal sotsiologii i sotsial'noy an- tropologii [Journal of sociology and social anthropology], 14 (3): 119–139. Neuschmid J., Gajevic L., Schrenk M., Wasserburger W. (2014) The Blind's Critical Space and the Role of Modern ICT. In: A. Calcatinge (ed.) Critical Spaces: Contemporary Per- spectives in Urban, Spatial and Landscape Studies. Münster: LIT Verlag: 179–203. Phillips S. (2018) Parallel'nyy mir [Parallel World]. In: A. Kurlenkova, E. Nosenko-Stein (eds.) Obratnaya storona Luny, ili chto my ne znaem ob invalidnosti: teoriya, reprezen- tatsii, praktiki [The Other Side of the Moon, or What We Don't Know about Disability: Theory, Representations, Practices]. Moscow: MBA publishers: 223–273. Scott J. (2005) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condi- tion Have Failed. Moscow: University book. Sen A., Sen K., Das J. (2018) Ultrasonic Blind Stick for Completely Blind People to Avoid Any Kind of Obstacles. 2018 IEEE SENSORS, New-Delhi, 28 October 2018. (Piscataway: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). Sennett R. (2016) Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilization. Mos- cow: Strelka Press. Stalingulag (2019) On Wheels with Artemy Lebedev. Through the Center of Moscow on a Wheelchair. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waKndLPoHxk (access 21 October 2021). Suchmen L. (2019) Rekonfiguratsii otnosheniy chelovek – mashina: plany i situativnye deystviya [Human-machine Reconfigurations: Plans and Situated Actions]. Moscow: El- ementary forms press. Williams M., Hurst A., Kane S. (2013) 'Pray before You Step Out': Describing Personal and Situational Blind Navigation Behaviors. 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Con- ference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS '13), Bellevue, 21 October 2013. Avail- able at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2513383.2513449 (accessed 21 October 2021). Wylsacom (2018) Kak nezryachiy pol'zuetsya iPhone, MacBook i Apple Watch [How Does a Blind Person Use iPhone, MacBook and Apple Watch]. Available at: https://www.you- tube.com/watch?v=RQiN 1Hhrxu0 (accessed 21 October 2021). Yarskaya-Smirnova E., Romanov P. (2010) Invalidnost' i obshchestvo: dvadtsat' let spustya [People with Disabilities and Society: Twenty Years Later]. Sotsiologicheskie Issledovaniia [Sociological Studies], (9): 50–58.