Good Lighting and Visual Contrast to Improve Accessibility in the Built Environment-A Literature Study Gregorio Feigusch1, Isabella Tiziana Steffan2(B), and Doris Ossberger3 1 European Ergonomist, Via G. Severano 35, 00161 Rome, Italy feigusch@mclink.it 2 STUDIO STEFFAN – Progettazione and Ricerca (Design and Research), Milan, Italy info@studiosteffan.it 3 Court Certified Expert for Accessibility/Universal Design, Vienna, Austria Abstract. In the general context of accessibility, the theme of considering the needs of people with visual impairments and of older people, by means of adequate lighting and visual contrast of building elements, is growing in importance and in interest by stakeholders. The authors describe the parameters mostly used to assess visual contrast. The discussion focuses onthe alternative between the use of the LRV (Light Reflectance Value) and the CIE Y tristimulus value, butalso onthe algorithms which best quantify the visual contrast between two adjacent surfaces, according with human perception. Attention is also devoted to the distinction between the assessment of the reflectance properties of building elements in the laboratory, and the check of the luminance contrast in the field. The paper compares some interna- tional and national accessibility standards, examining the quantities considered for the expression of visual contrast (e.g. luminance, LRV, CIE Y tristimulus value) and the algorithms used to quantify visual contrast. The comparison highlights a grow- ing tendency to abandon the LRV difference formula, focusing on formulas using a ratio, which are more suited to simulate human perception. For the future, the authors suggest that the TGs working at "vertical" interna- tional and national standards, containing references to accessibility for people with visual impairments, take into account this new approach, which is to be considered as an important step forward for the evaluation of visual contrast. Keywords: Accessible built environment · Visual contrast · Impaired vision · LRV · CIE Y Visual Accessibility in the Built Environment In the general context of accessibility in the built environment, the theme of taking into account the needs of people with visual impairments (including older people) is growing in importance and in interest by stakeholders (public administrations, standardization bodies, disability movements and associations, designers, manufacturers, etc.). Consequently, the more recent evolution of international standards and guidelines about accessibility pays great attention to the definition of design considerations for a © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021 N. L. Black et al. (Eds.): IEA 2021, LNNS 220, pp. 367–375, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74605-6_46 visual environment aimed at facilitating the perception of information, orientation and safety of movements. Although requirements concerning lighting are generally expressed in terms of illu- minance, the only parameter that determines human vision is luminance, that is the photometric quantity which quantifies the sensation of brightness. By the fact, the possibility to distinguish and recognize two adjacent surfaces, as for instance a door in a wall, or the symbol on a signal, depends on two factors: A sufficient difference in lightness of the two surfaces generally referred to as "visual contrast", or "luminance contrast" (the term lightness is used here to express the extent to which an object reflects the incident light, not as a parameter of a colour space system); An adequate lighting for them. These factors are both essential: without a sufficient lighting, even two surfaces with an adequate difference in lightness could be hard to discriminate; on the other hand, even a good lighting could be not sufficient to grant the perception of two adjacent surfaces too similar in lightness. In fact, while people with normal vision and ability to discriminate colors can rely on both luminance contrast and color differences, many people with visual impairments and older people may have difficulties in color recognition, being able to distinguish adjacent surfaces essentially by their luminance contrast. This is the reason for which accessibility standards usually make reference only to luminance contrast for the assessment of visual contrast. Among the two factors listed above, the requirement for adequate lighting is generally covered specifying a minimum medium maintained illuminance on the reference plane (a typical value is 100 lx), or else referring to lighting standards. On the contrary, the requirement for visual (or luminance) contrast is much more controversial. This paper originates by an in-depth examination of technical literature about this matter, which the authors performed also to contribute to work in progress for the defini- tion or update of International and European standards. Nevertheless, this paper reflects only the personal opinions of the authors, without any direct implication on the activities of the various TCs now working at the implementation or revision of the standards. Luminance Contrast When dealing with lighting, vision, and photometry, one cannot do without referring to CIE. CIE is the French acronym for "Commission Internationale De l'Eclairage", which is the international technical, scientific and cultural non-profit organization more deeply involved in the Matter of vision and lighting. Both CEN and ISO have established agreements with CIE aimed at a reciprocal cooperation in the elaboration of standards [4]. Also for this reason, when dealing with light and vision, as it is the case with visual and luminance contrast, one should as much as possible refer to CIE publications, CIE definitions of photometric quantities and related measurement methodologies. CIE definition for luminance is a very complex one, but for the purpose of this paper it will be enough to remember that luminance is the photometric quantity related to the human sensation of brightness and it is expressed in candela per square meter (cd/m2). It is important here to define the luminance contrast: we will refer to CIE vocabulary definition (17-22-091): Luminance Contrast:quantity relating to the difference in luminance between two surfaces. Note 1 to entry: Widely accepted definitions include: C = (L1 L2)/L1 with L1 > L2 (positive contrast), C = (L1 L2)/L1 with L1 < L2 (negative contrast), C = (L1 L2)/(L1 + L2) with L1 > L2, where C is the luminance contrast and L1 and L2 are the luminance values of the two surfaces. As one can see, all the "accepted definitions" are based on ratio formulas. As explained above, an adequate luminance contrast between an object and its background is essential to perceive objects and recognize building elements, signals and so on, pro- vided that lighting is sufficient. But the more correct way to quantify and evaluate the reflecting properties of surfaces is just one of most debated and controversial topics in both international and national accessibility standards, and in guidelines. Furthermore, current accessibility standards sometimes fail to stress the difference between laboratory type tests and on-site acceptance tests. Laboratory type tests should be performed on samples of building elements (such as control panels and buttons for lifts, symbols and background on signage, etc.), so that manufacturers can publish in their technical data sheets the reflectance properties of their products, to be used by architects and designers at the design stage. Instruments with high accuracies (typically spectrophotometers or colorimeters), compliant with standardized measuring conditions (illumination and observation geometry, standardized light source), should be used for this type of tests. On-site tests should be performed under real lighting conditions and should be aimed essentially at evaluating if the luminance contrast value planned at the design stage has been achieved and if the lighting of the scenario (e.g. a door in a wall, the control plate in a lift, a signage for wayfinding, etc.) can be deemed as adequate in connection with the luminance contrast. Even if the instruments needed (typically a luminance meter or a luminance meter camera, mounted on a tripod) are fairly expensive and ask for skilled operators, measurements should be regarded as "industrial grade measurements", due to the difficulty to reproduce the geometric conditions required by the different standards and to assess the lighting conditions. Similar measurement arrangements might be used, as well as in the field, also in laboratory, for instance in order to enable a lift manufacturer to check the compliance of the setup for a car at the design stage, before series production. Methodologies Currently Used to Assess the Luminous Reflectance Properties of Surfaces and Building Elements Until now, we have not yet highlighted an essential aspect of the problem: the inputs into the luminance contrast formulas in the CIE definition (17-22-091) are (obviously enough) the luminance values of the two adjacent surfaces under test; that is, they are relative to a specific installation and lighting scenario, or else to a specific simulation in laboratory. But, what about the methodologies currently used by the most relevant accessibility standards and guidelines to assess and measure the intrinsic reflectance properties of a surface and the achievable degree of visual contrast between two adjacent surfaces? The authors had the opportunity to compare several accessibility standards (both international and national) and guidelines, with specific reference to these methodologies. This work is the natural prosecution of studies began some years ago [12]. Until now most of the standards and guidelines evaluate the lightness of a surface, referring to a quantity named LRV (Light Reflectance Value). Then, for the assessment of the visual contrast between two adjacent surfaces, several standards use simple difference formulas, of the type: LRV1 LRV2 (1) where LRV1 and LRV2 are the Light Reflectance Values of the lighter and of the darker surface. This approach is in contradiction with the great majority of researches on vision, which show that human perception of brightness changes approximately with the ratio between luminance values, rather than with the difference. For this reason, formulas using ratios should be preferred to simple difference formulas, in order to assess the visual contrast between two surfaces; the CIE definition itself (17-22-091) is an enforcement of this assumption. Going back to the use of LRV (Light Reflectance Value), it would be preferable to quantify the intrinsic reflectance properties of a surface, referring to the Y tristimulus value, as defined by CIE. The debate of using CIE Y tristimulus value rather than LRV is mostly a vocabulary matter; in fact, we can say that all the standards and guidelines using Light Reflectance Values clearly state that "LRV is the same as CIE Y". So, why should we prefer a definite reference to CIE Y rather than a systematic reference to LRV, even if followed by the note "LRV is the same as CIE Y"? The main reason is that LRV is not defined properly. A typical definition is that in ISO 21542:2011 [16], (3.41): light reflectance value (LRV). proportion of visible light reflected by a surface at all wavelengths and directions when illuminated by a light source. NOTE 1 LRV is also known as the luminance reflectance factor or CIE Y value (see International Commission on Illumination, CIE, Publication 15:2004, 3rd Edition, Colorimetry). NOTE 2 The LRV is expressed on a scale of 0 to 100, with a value of 0 points for pure black and a value of 100 points for pure white. This definition seems to describe LRV as a ratio between the reflected light and the incident light on the sample, rather than as a ratio between the two luminance values of the sample under test and of a white perfect reflecting diffuser, identically irradiated and viewed. Moreover, the definition fails to specify that the energy reflected at each wavelength is to be weighted by the spectral sensitivity of the standard photometric observer CIE 1931 V (λ). Finally, the definition fails to specify that the measurement of LRV has to be performed according to a standardized geometry for the incident and the reflected rays and with reference to a standard light source. An obstacle to a complete replacement of LRV by CIE Y is the fact that LRV is diffusely used in commercial environment: for instance, many paint companies post the LRV value of a color right on the fan deck of colors, so it is easy for architects and designers to choose colors to use for building elements. A good trade-off, between this commercial widespread use of LRV and the need for maximum scientific accuracy could be obtained reversing the current approach: the authors are favorable to a systematic reference to CIE Y in the scientific publications and standards, with the specification that in commercial applications the most used term is LRV, which has in principle the same meaning and definition. The second aspect which needs to be revised refers to the assessment of the visual contrast between two adjacent surfaces. As explained above, formulas using ratios should be preferred to simple difference formulas. One of the most used ratio formulas is the Michelson contrast formula: (Y1 Y2)/(Y1 + Y2) (2) for use when the reflectance properties of a building element have been published by the manufacturer or have been measured in laboratory, or (L1 L2)/(L1 + L2) (3) for use if the luminance of the two adjacent surfaces has been measured in the field (the replacement of CIE Y values with luminance values can be made without significant errors only in case of diffusing, non-shiny, surfaces.). Other formulas using ratios are those by Weber and by Bowman - Sapolinsky: (L1 L2)/L2(Weber contrast formula) (4) 125 × (Y1 Y2)/(Y1 + Y2 + 25)(Bowman - Sapolinski contrast formula) (5) In the above formulas, L1 stands for the luminance of the brighter area and L2 stands for the luminance of the adjacent darker area, whether Y1 and Y2 are the corresponding CIE tristimulus values. Existing Standards and Recommendations – A Literature Study The authors examined several accessibility standards, recommendations and guidelines with a focus on the assessment of visual contrast [1–11, 13–23]. In this paper are sum- marized the requirements of just a few publications, chosen not only for their relevance, but also in order to highlight the different approaches (Table 1). Table 1. A comparison between visual contrast requirements in some standards Document Lighting Visual contrast Visual contrast for Visual contrast for Visual contrast for small surfaces, text information determination large surfaces small method surfaces, potential hazards ISO Minimum light LRV LRV LRV LRV 21542:2011 level in different difference difference difference difference [16] areas is specified1 in points2 30 p 60 p 60 p ISO/DIS 21542:2020 Minimum maintained Michelson formula for CM 30 or CM 60 or CM 60 or [15] illuminances in different areas are building elements CW 45 min plus LRV CW 75 plus LRV CW 75 plus LRV specified3 Weber of lighter of lighter of lighter formula for surface 40 surface 50 surface 70 small elements ÖNORM B LRV values apply LRV Level II Level I Level I 1600:20174 for illuminance difference K 30 K 50 K 50 [21] 100 lx5 without unit indication BS Average and LRV LRV 30 p LRV 70 p 8300–2:2018 minimum difference in LRV 20 p. [3] maintained points acceptable, if illuminances are illuminance specified 200 lx AS Bowman C 30 C 30 1428.1:2009 – Sapolinsky [1] Formula Note 1: (e.g.: 100 lx for horizontal surfaces indoors) Note 2: for lighting conditions lower than specified, the difference in LRVs should be higher;Michelson, Weber, Sapolinsky formulas are also mentioned Note 3: (e.g.: 100 lx for horizontal surfaces indoors) Note 4: section on visual contrast is currently under revision Note 5: for minimum lighting requirements, the standard makes reference to EN 12464-1 and EN 12464-2, "Light and lighting - Lighting of work places" (additional lighting required for workplaces of partially sighted persons) Without any doubt, the most relevant standard dealing with accessibility of buildings is ISO 21542:2011, "Accessibility and usability of the built environment". In this standard, the method for determination and specification of visual con- trast was based on the difference in LRV of the two adjacent surfaces, or of an ele- ment and its background (LRV1–LRV2). In its revised version (to be published in 2021), ISO/DIS 21542:2020 [15] incorporates a different approach, which represents a substantial improvement in the assessment of visual contrast. Although confirming the use of LRV for the description of the reflectance prop- erties of building elements, the new standard will introduce the following important improvements: a better definition for LRV (proportion of visible light reflected by a surface, weighted for the spectral sensitivity to light of the human eye); a clear statement of the equivalence between LRV and CIE Y, together with the specification that the latter "is evaluated with reference to the standard illuminant CIE D65 and to the geometry dif/8°"; the adoption of Michelson formula or Weber formula for the determination of luminance contrast instead of the simple difference formula LRV1-LRV2; a very detailed and correct treatment of visual contrast; an exhaustive treatment of recommended measurement methodologies, with a clear distinction between tests more suitable in the laboratory and those more suitable in the field. While the former LRV difference formula was based on a study by Cook and Bright [2] - which, by the way, was also the main source for contrast requirements in British Standard 8300:2018 [3] -, the recommendation in a guideline published by the "Centre Suisse pour la construction adaptée aux handicapés" in 2017 [22] might have had an impact on the decision to switch to Michelson and Weber formula in the revision of ISO 21542:2011. Considering, that e.g. the Austrian national standard ÖNORM B 1600:2017, "Bar- rierefreies Bauen - Planungsgrundlagen" [21] will probably undergo a similar modifi- cation by changing from LRV difference to Michelson formula in the current revision, one might assume there is a general tendency to focus on formulas using a ratio. Another interesting approach is suggested with introduction of the Sapolinsky for- mula in the national Australian standard "Design for Access and Mobility" [2], which makes a clear distinction between tests in the laboratory and tests in the field. Authors' Proposal The authors are definitely satisfied with the new approach to visual contrast assessment introduced in the revision of ISO 21542 now at the stage of ISO/FDIS. The adoption of the ratio formulas by Michelson and Weber instead of the difference formula recommended by ISO 21542:2011 is an important result. The new text, with its comprehensive description of visual contrast, will promote a more extended application of the standard, both at the design stage, and in the tests in the field. For the future, the authors suggest that the TGs working at "vertical" international and national standards containing references to accessibility for people with visual impair- ments, take into account the new approach in ISO 21542, reaping the rewards of the work done. In this way, the confusions that today still originate by the diversity between the different existing standards will be gradually eliminated, with great benefits for the stakeholders and the users of buildings. Certainly, there is a need for the prosecution of researches aimed at a deeper compre- hension of the perception of visual contrast by people with visual impairments in order to define algorithms capable to offer the best achievable correlation between the visual contrast values produced by the formula and the visual perception by the human eye. In this context, it would be useful to study the possibility of taking into account, besides the visual contrast, also an additional contribution by colour contrast, which persons who are capable of colour discrimination at least to a certain degree would benefit from. A very precious guide, for this goal, is ensured by the EN ISO 24502:2010 [18]. Conclusion The use of Michelson and Weber formulas, according to the recommendations in the ISO/DIS 21542:2020, is a great step forward in order to evaluate visual contrast. Nevertheless, further research work, in cooperation between scientists of different fields, could bring to algorithms capable to offer the best achievable correlation between the visual contrast values produced by the formula and the visual perception by the human eye, contributing to improve accessibility of built environment. References AS 1428.1:2009 Design for access and mobility, Part 1: General requirements for access - New building work Bright, K. et al.: Colour, Contrast & Perception - Design Guidance for Internal Built Environments. Revised edition. The University of Reading, UK (2004) BS 8300–2:2018 Design of an accessible and inclusive built environment, Part 2: Buildings. Code of practice CIE liaison: https://cie.co.at/about-cie/liaisons. Accessed 4 Feb 2021 Code on Accessibility in the Built Environment 2019, Singapore: Building and Construction Authority CSA B651:2018 Accessible design for the built environment, Standard Council of Canada DIN 18040–1:2010 Barrierefreies Bauen - Planungsgrundlagen - Teil 1: Öffentlich zugängliche Gebäude DIN 32975:2009 Gestaltung visueller Informationen im öffentlichen Raum zur barrierefreien Nutzung EN 16584–1:2017 Railway applications - Design for PRM use - General requirements - Part 1: Contrast EN 16584–2:2017 Railway applications - Design for PRM use - General requirements - Part 2: Information EN 81–70:2020 Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts—Particular appli- cations for passenger and goods passenger lift—Part 70: Accessibility to lifts for persons including persons with disability Feigusch, G., Steffan, I.T.: Accessibility and Visual Contrast: A proposal for a better evaluation of this physical quantity. In: Bagnara, S., Tartaglia, R., Albolino, S., Alexander, T., Fujita, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the 20th Congress of International Ergonomics Association - IEA 2018: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 824, 1642–1648, Springer, Cham, Switzerland (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96071-5_168 FprCEN/TR 17621:2021 Accessibility and usability of the built environment - Technical performance criteria and specifications Hauck, N.: Barrierefreie Beleuchtungslösungen für sehbehinderte Menschen in Innenräumen sowie Entwicklung einer Kontrastbestimmungsmethode. Wien: Dissertation TU Wien (2018) ISO/DIS 21542:2020 Building construction—Accessibility and usability of the built Envi- ronment ISO 21542:2011 Building construction—Accessibility and usability of the built Environment ISO 24502:2010 Ergonomics-Accessible design-Specification of age-related luminance contrast for coloured light ISO 9241 -303:2008 Ergonomics of human-system interaction- Part 303 Requirements for electronic visual Displays ISO 3864–1:2002 Graphical symbols—Safety colours and safety signs- Part 1: Design principles for safety signs in workplaces and public areas Mühlthaler, E., et al.: Barrierefreies Bauen - Kontrastreiche Gestaltung öffentlich zugänglicher Gebäude. Deutscher Blinden- und Sehbehindertenverband e. V. - DBSV, Berlin (2016) ÖNORM B 1600:2017 Barrierefreies Bauen – Planungsgrundlagen Schmidt, E., Buser, F.: Contrastes visuels - Directives "Conception et determination de con- trastes visuels", Ed. Centre Suisse pour la construction adaptée aux handicapés, Zurich (CH), (2017) SIA 500:2009 Hindernisfreie Bauten