A data model for pedestrian routes Petros Laskas, Stamatis Dimitriadis, Alexandros Koritsoglou, Kyriakos Koritsoglou, Ioannis Fudos Dept of Computer Science and Engineering University of Ioannina Ioannina, Greece laskasp15@gmail.com, stamdim1995@gmail.com, akorit@hotmail.com, kyriakos.koritsoglou@gmail.com, fudos@uoi.gr Abstract—Digital geographic platforms like Google Maps or Bing Maps provide user-friendly interfaces for navigating through cities. Although, these apps are used daily for shortest paths calculation within the urban centers, they were designed with an emphasis on the needs of motor vehicles and therefore pedestrian routes have only been considered as an add-on option. For that reason, current pedestrian navigation services provide routes based on road networks as they are well defined due to the popularity of car navigation systems on one hand and the lack of pedestrian data (including streets, sidewalks, curb ramps, elevation data, and construction permit information) on the other hand. However, road networks do not adequately represent the paths that pedestrians use. Furthermore, for people with limited mobility, planning a route using a wheelchair in urban centers is very difficult due to lack of information regarding accessibility along the route. To this end, better data on pedestrian sections are needed to improve safety, comfort, and convenience of pedestrian movement. This process requires a carefully developed methodology for modeling pedestrian routes. This paper introduces a structured approach to develop a simple model of pedestrian data that captures all required information and facilitates the design of user-friendly interactive navigation systems. A pilot case is presented for the historical center of Thessaloniki city. Keywords—Accessibility, Pedestrian Navigation, Urban Mobility, Mapmaking, Wheelchair Users, Disability INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1) Digital geographic platforms like Google Maps or Bing Maps provide user-friendly interfaces for navigating through cities. Hence, these apps are daily used by an increasing number of users for different types of activities since they can be adapted for various needs with individual user requirements [1]. The term adaptive map identifies digital maps that can be adapted to the specific needs and requirements of each user as well as the mobile device he uses [2]. Although these applications are widely used to calculate shortest routes to specific destinations within urban centers, they were designed with an emphasis on the needs of motor vehicles and therefore pedestrian navigation was only considered as an additional option with limited functionality [3]. While these digital platforms contain a lot of data (i.e., points of interest, landscape, and environmental data, etc), the information regarding physical accessibility is still considered poor, as most of them contain little or no information about the accessibility of pedestrian networks [4]. For that reason, current pedestrian navigation services provide routes based on road networks as they are well defined due to the popularity of car navigation systems on one hand and the lack of pedestrian data (including streets, sidewalks, curb ramps, elevation data, and construction permit information) in many areas on the other hand [5]. However, road networks do not adequately represent the paths that pedestrians usually travel and alongside for people with limited mobility, planning a route is very difficult due to lack of information regarding accessibility along that route [6]. Limited mobility significantly reduces the level of independence and autonomous living of certain population groups as this level depends on the ability to access daily needs such as nutrition, health care, education, and employment. According to studies, there is a direct correlation between the standard of living of the disabled people and the level of mobility. In addition, there are obvious indications that the restriction of movement leads to significant decline in mental and physical health and well- being in general. To improve the ability of people with mobility issues to move around, the accessibility aspect of sidewalks should be integrated within the core functions of map services [7], so that end users can get comprehensive information on routes that they intend to take. With this approach it will be possible to design the most suitable route according to their preferences and needs and in addition they will be able to judge for themselves whether they need assistance or not for the traversal of the specific route. A spatial database designed for pedestrians would increase their awareness and help them easily navigate within unfamiliar environments [8]. Nowadays, in the EU countries the appropriate legislative and regulatory framework that suits the needs of people with disabilities is well established. Alongside, different acts, such as the European Concept for Accessibility (ECA) [9] and the European Design for All e-Accessibility Network (EDeAN) [10], provide various guidelines to direct the building of environments that are equally accessible to all people. Despite the progress made on various accessibility issues, pedestrians with reduced mobility still face obstacles and difficulties as they move around in their daily lives as the most important problem remains the collection and integration of accessibility information about the natural physical world into maps [11]. To resolve this issue, better data on pedestrian sections are needed to improve safety, comfort, and convenience of pedestrian movement. This process requires a carefully developed methodology for modeling pedestrian routes. This paper describes an approach used to developing a simple model of pedestrian data that incorporates all required information and facilitates the design of user-friendly interactive navigation systems. A pilot case is presented for the historical center of Thessaloniki city. The main objective of this paper is to study the spatial information as well as the map data content required for the design of digital adaptive map applications, in order to provide an easy to use daily tool for the comfortable and safe movement of people with limited mobility, and in particular wheelchair users in the inhospitable urban centers. In addition, the result of this research will be the creation of a guidelines set both for the collection of primary spatial data Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Washington Libraries. Downloaded on July 11,2023 at 19:08:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 978-1-6654-2742-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE and for the development of geospatial databases in the terms of accessibility and Design for All [12]. RELATED WORK There is a variety of studies discussing several aspects on pedestrian routing regarding people with limited mobility. Initially, in [13] and [4] are presented the main challenges in accessible maps. The creation of computational models that accurately describe the accessibility of the real world is a key challenge. Also, the data collection process is a difficult task that demands multilayer and complex solutions. End-user personalization and accessibility information are two core requirements of adaptive map applications in order to meet the needs of different kind of users. Last but not least, both surveys highlight the lack of common ground in the methodologies proposed for spatial data collection. Other studies focus on the evaluation of existing systems and applications. In [14], a model that evaluates categories such as safety, effort, exploration and pleasure for quality-aware route navigation systems has been developed. This kind of metric differs from the most common one that takes into account only shortest path or time and thus, it can be vital for a map application that targets people with limited mobility. In [8], the examination on existing geospatial databases from the accessibility perspective has shown that important data related to accessibility of pedestrian sections is still missing. This problem, as we see in [15], results in low quality applications that do not meet the needs of people with mobility problems. More specifically, this research concluded that the routes for wheelchair users were longer and more complex than those for pedestrians due to missing information. There are also some researches that discuss and analyze different methods for collecting geospatial data. The reason that traditional mapping techniques are not used in literature is that adaptive map applications require high level of detail and hence specialized staff or volunteers are needed for this task. In addition, the volume of data for each unban area is very large which means that it can not be collected by a single research team as a part of a project. Therefore, applications that rely solely on the data of the road network of digital geographic platforms and provide information for routing in pedestrian sections by making assumptions about mobility issues (i.e., each road has an accessible sidewalk to its left and right) or they are based on the volunteering of a small group of people for the development, maintenance and collection of the pedestrian data may never meet the requirements to reliably serve the needs of disabled people. One proposed way of collecting is with collaborative user- mapping from volunteers using GPS traces or mobile applications that use LiDAR sensors [16] and [6]. The second method seems very promising as by taking LiDAR images, a large amount of data regarding urban sidewalks can be collected and finally with the proper processing of these images to export reliable information about the accessibility of those sidewalks. For extra user engagement, a more attractive and advanced way is through a mobile application that employs gamification techniques [3]. However, there is always a concern about generated routes based on invalid pedestrian data, which should be rejected. Another proposed solution [16] is the image processing using high-resolution satellites and laser imageries, but it is a very expensive process. Finally machine learning could be helpful in many ways like calculating the pedestrian volume to improve safety and convenience [5] or using social media to detect events that may affect accessibility [6] (i.e., works in specific sidewalks). Given that the pedestrian network of urban areas changes very rarely, our aim was to create a simple methodology for collecting the least required primary information, capable of calculating the shortest accessible paths between a source point and a destination one. The simplified model proposed ensures the relatively easy on-site scanning of pedestrian sections and therefore the rapid coverage of large city areas. An important advantage of the proposed method is that it does not require the presence of specialized engineers with experience in GIS applications, and due to its thorough and detailed documentation it can be used to collect accessibility data regarding urban sidewalks from different groups of users who will simply receive a brief training. Proposed Methodology Description In this section the key steps of the proposed methodology will be described as well as the necessary accessibility data to be collected. First of all, it should be mentioned that a pedestrian section is considered accessible only when its width is more than 1.5 meters and its surface is smooth. In addition, there should be no obstacles into it that make the wheelchair movement difficult or make it completely inaccessible. Finally, various floor elements that create elevation differences such as stairs or surface slopes (slopes of more than 10% are not accessible without the help of an attendant) should also be recorded and evaluated. The above conditions represent the most ideal use case scenario. However, there is a significant number of sidewalks in which navigation, under certain conditions, is possible but clearly with more difficulty on the part of individuals with limited mobility. Such cases are recorded when at a single point or throughout the length of a segment its width is less than 1.5 meters but at least 0.9 meters as otherwise it is considered inaccessible. A similar case arises when the surface of a section is not completely smooth (pebbles, broken pavement slabs, etc.) but does not prevent access to it. These sections are classified as less accessible, but they are still recorded as for some routes it is mandatory to use them. In Figure 1 it is shown that the minimum width of a pedestrian section so that wheelchair is able to move in it, is 0.90 meters. However, this case concerns the movement in only one direction as the user cannot rotate the wheelchair, since a width of at least 1.5 meters is required. Figure 1. Minimum width for wheelchair accessibility. Finally, an equally important element that must be evaluated is the available ramps of the network as through them, pedestrian sections that are either on the opposite side of the same road or are located at an intersection/crossroad are Figure 2. Visualization of pedestrian navigation data for the historic center of Thessaloniki. connected. Therefore, for each ramp, we need to know its coordinates (Latitude and Longitude) as well as some of its basic characteristics such as its available width (the recommended free ramp width between its perimeters is generally 1.30m) and slope. Therefore, in order to fully record the accessibility characteristics of an urban pedestrian network, every section and every ramp within it should be scanned either on site or remotely. For this reason, methodologies regarding this subject should clearly define the steps by which the necessary data are collected so that they can be used for the calculation of accessible routes. In our approach a hybrid method was used to determine the pedestrian sections that form the pedestrian network graph. In order to reduce the time required for the on-site scanning of each sidewalk segment, the geographical delimiter of each one, i.e. the coordinate extraction of the beginning and end of it, was carried out through the API of the google maps platform since our routing application is based on the this platform. Using this methodology, it was easier then to connect each section to its neighbouring ones either through a ramp or not. This procedure allowed us to form the graph of our use case pedestrian network (i.e, the historical center of Thessaloniki city) remotely from the laboratory. Moreover, for the period during which the current research was carried out, this option ultimately proved to be very flexible and productive as during the COVID-19 pandemic since field recording work needed special permits. At the end of the first phase, as much pedestrian route data as possible regarding each section was remotely collected and the specially designed registration forms, for the purposes of the current paper, were updated. These forms, one for each section, will be cross validated during the second phase of the on-site data collection in which the level of accessibility of each section will be assessed while identifying obstacles that make it difficult or completely prevent the passage through them. After the completion of the second phase, the registration forms will be digitized and then it will be possible to complete the pedestrian network graph that is the subject of this paper. For each graph edge, in addition to its actual distance we have recorded two additional. Its level of accessibility (accessible, difficult to access, not accessible) and whether it represents the connection of other sections via ramp. At the end of this process a graph consisting of 790 nodes and 2008 edges was formed as shown in Figure 2. The basic steps of the methodology described in this section are summarized below and an additional image explaining specific procedures in more detail is listed. The first phase of recording consists of the following six steps: A1: Delimit each segment by taking the coordinates of its start and end through the Google Maps platform API. Α2: Add the necessary intermediate points to each section so that when viewed on the map it is connected to the pavement and not to the motor vehicle road. Α3: Characterization of the current segment whether is ramp or not. A4: Connect the beginning of each section with its neighbouring ones. A5: Connect the end of each section with its neighbouring ones. A6: Calculate the length of each segment using the Haversine formula. Finally, the second phase of the procedure consists of the following step: B1: Characterization of the accessibility level of each section according to the on-site evaluation data. For the needs of step A1, a small application was developed which for each point added to the map returns its longitude and latitude. With this process, all the 790 nodes of the final graph were placed. Figure 3. Visualisation of steps A2, A3, A4, A5 and B1. Figure 3 depicts steps A2, A3, A4, A5 and B1. A typical example of step A2 is the edge starting at node 245 and ending at 246. We observe that three intermediate modes have been placed so that the projection of this section on the map is in contact with the pavement. The edges representing passage through ramps are shown in blue colour. In this subgroup of the graph there are 9 such edges ([268,1], [267,310], [310,245], [2,9], [81,196], [80,246], [84,197], [199,244], [242,201] ). In addition, it is obvious how the edges are connected to their neighboring ones (steps A4 and A5). Indicatively, we can mention the edge [243,241] which is connected at node 243 with the edges [243,244] and [243,245] while at node 241 it is connected with the edge [241,242]. Finally, as mentioned earlier, we have defined three levels of accessibility for each section (accessible, difficult to access, not accessible). In step B1, this characterization is performed, which is also reflected in color on the map. The green color corresponds to the accessible parts, the yellow to the parts that are more difficult to access and the red to the parts that are not accessible. CONCLUSIONS The purpose of this research was to design a simple hybrid process for collecting accessibility data of pedestrian sections in urban areas. Initially, with the assistance of an experienced engineer in GIS applications and the compilation of the current legislation and the regulatory framework, the minimum information required for the calculation of accessible routes within the urban centers was gathered. Τhen, the coordinates of the start and the end of each section were collected using the google maps platform API so that they can be displayed on it as a result of the end-user queries. Subsequently, the members of the teams that carried out the on-site registering of pedestrian data of the areas were first briefed to gather the accessibility information of each predefined section using the specially designed reporting forms. Finally, data collected are used to form the graph representing the pedestrian network of the historic center of the city of Thessaloniki and then by using a heuristic algorithm to calculate the shortest accessible routes. For future work, we will evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology and adjust the heuristic algorithm maximize effectiveness and efficiency. Acknowledgment This research has been co financed by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH – CREATE – INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-00108). References Sarjakoski, L. T., & Sarjakoski, T. (2008). User Interfaces and Adaptive Maps. Hampe, M., & Paelke, V. (2005, September). Adaptive maps for mobile applications. InProceedings of the Mobile Maps Workshop at MobileHCI (Vol. 5, p. 19). Kapenekakis, I., & Chorianopoulos, K. (2017). Citizen science for pedestrian cartography: collection and moderation of walkable routes in cities through mobile gamification. Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences, 7(1), 1-23. Brock, A. M., Froehlich, J. E., Guerreiro, J., Tannert, B., Caspi, A., Schöning, J., & Landau, S. (2018, April). Sig: Making maps accessible and putting accessibility in maps. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-4). Schneider, R. J., Arnold, L. S., & Ragland, D. R. (2009). Pilot model for estimating pedestrian intersection crossing volumes. Transportation research record, 2140(1), 13-26. Karimi, H. A., & Kasemsuppakorn, P. (2013). Pedestrian network map generation approaches and recommendation. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 27(5), 947-962. Magnusson, C., Tollmar, K., Brewster, S., Sarjakoski, T., Sarjakoski, T., & Roselier, S. (2009, April). Exploring future challenges for haptic, audio and visual interfaces for mobile maps and location based services. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Location and the Web(pp. 1-4). Laakso, M., Sarjakoski, T., & Sarjakoski, L. T. (2011). Improving accessibility information in pedestrian maps and databases. Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 46(2), 101- 108. http://www.eca.lu/ https://usercentredbusiness.designforall.org/ Hecht, B., Schöning, J., Erickson, T., & Priedhorsky, R. (2011). Geographic human-computer interaction. In CHI'11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 447-450). Klironomos, I., Antona, M., Basdekis, I., & Stephanidis, C. (2006). White paper: Promoting design for all and e-accessibility in Europe. Universal Access in the Information Society, 5(1), 105-119. Froehlich, J. E., Brock, A. M., Caspi, A., Guerreiro, J., Hara, K., Kirkham, R., ... & Tannert, B. (2019). Grand challenges in accessible maps. interactions, 26(2), 78-81. Siriaraya, P., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Wakamiya, S., Jeszenszky, P., Kawai, Y., & Jatowt, A. (2020). Beyond the Shortest Route: A Survey on Quality-Aware Route Navigation for Pedestrians. IEEE Access, 8, 135569-135590. Tannert, B., & Schöning, J. (2018, September). Disabled, but at what cost? an examination of wheelchair routing algorithms. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (pp. 1-7) Luaces, M. R., Fisteus, J. A., Sánchez-Fernández, L., Munoz-Organero, M., Balado, J., Díaz-Vilariño, L., & Lorenzo, H. (2021). Accessible routes integrating data from multiple sources. ISPRS International Journal of Geo- Information, 10(1), 7.