Safety in inclusive schools: what about persons with special educational needs and disabilities? EMMANUEL KOFI GYIMAH The study investigated safety-related issues in inclusive schools in Ghana. A descriptive cross-sectional survey design using a safety perception questionnaire was adopted for the study. Fourteen inclusive basic schools and 330 teachers were selected using the census technique. The response rate was 80% representing 264 teachers. The data were analysed using descriptive statistics, that is, mean, standard deviation and pie-chart diagram. It was revealed that the social relationship among children with special educational needs and disability (SEND), their peers without any disability and teachers was cordial. However, most aspects of the built environment were not accessible to children with SEND. It was also revealed that injuries such as bruises, cuts and abrasions were prevalent among the children. The study recommends that safety issues in inclusive schools should be taken seriously to build the self-esteem of children with SEND. Key words: safety, inclusiveness, disability, implementation and accessibility. © 2021 NASEN DOI: 10.1111/1467-9604.12385 Introduction Aside other forms of abuse, persons with disability experience high rates of unsafe conditions in their school environment such as bias-based bullying, often com- pounded by social isolation and difficulty in accessing some school facilities that were built without having the special child in mind (Briggs and Hawkins, 2005; Mepham, 2010; Stalker and McArthur, 2012). Chronic teasing and harassment on school campus affect to appreciable degree disabled children' confidence, mental health and sense of belonging at school, thus, reinforcing their loneliness and leaving them in an increasingly vulnerable social and emotional position (Pugh and Chitiyo, 2012). In addition to harm resulting from bullying, research from several countries shows that children with intellectual disability experience other interpersonal harms at school, both intentional and unintentional. Example, chil- dren with disability appear to be at a greater risk of sexual abuse, whether by other children or teachers/care staff (Caldas and Bensy, 2014; Llewellyn et al., 2016). Other harms are perhaps less intentional, resulting from school systems and administrative needs. For instance, children describe having their means of communication, movement and relationships with peers constrained by the preferences and administrative needs of staff (Hoskin, 2010; MacArthur, 2012; Salmon, 2013). Safety-related issues on school campuses that practice inclusive education are good reasons for directly involving children with disability in research concern- ing their lives, not least to help ensure that education policies and programmes are responsive to their needs and lived experience (Sloper and Beresford, 2014). A number of studies have shown that children with disability and their parents have varying perspectives on how the experience of impairment and disability af- fect children's lives (Stalker and Connors, ; Goodley and Runswick-Cole, 2011). These effects include the fact that children with disability getting injured when using, for example, staircases or laboratories that are not disability friendly (Pugh and Chitiyo, 2012). Some of the children with disability, especially, the female also get sexually abused by teachers and other school staff (Caldas and Bensy, 2014). Movement of children with disabilities to some public places of conve- nience such as toilet facilities and urinal are marked with some amount of danger (Llewellyn et al., 2016). Creating safe and accessible school facilities is challenging (Ramirez et al., 2004). Campuses, called special education schools, incorporate structural modifications © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 651 such as wheelchair ramps, wide doors, and elevators. Even with these features, those with disabilities may be at high risk of injury. Language, cognitive, and motor skill limitations could complicate the processing of physical hazards at school (Gaebler- Spira, 2011). Designing suitable school environments for these children is further complicated by their varying functional levels. Autistic and deaf children, for ex- ample, differ in their behavioural, social, and physical capacities. This may lead to differential risk of injury, but risk in this population has neither been measured nor compared. However, in parts of world, some statistics have been given. For example, in the United States of America, the National Pediatric Trauma Registry reported that youth with disabilities sustain 17% of all school-related injuries but represent fewer than 2% of the student population of the United States (Snyder, 2002). Also, Woringer (as cited in Ramirez et al., 2004) from Switzerland reported high injury rates in 'special' classes of developmentally disabled children. Furthermore, Ohito (as cited in Ramirez et al., 2004) reported that Handicapped schoolchildren in Africa had higher rates of dental injury than able-bodied children. Injury is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children, therefore injury prevention rather than overprotection in this special population is important particu- larly as societies move toward greater inclusion (UNICEF Office of Research, 2013). Children with disabilities are also thought to be at greater risk of unintentional injury (Xiang et al., 2014). Over the years, studies have documented the nature and preva- lence of injuries in children and children with special education needs. Ramirez et al. (2004) explored the epidemiology of school-related injury among children enrolled in 17 special education schools in one large, urban school district. Altogether 6769 school children with disabilities were followed up from 1994 to 1998. Injury and population data were collected from pupil accident reports and existing school re- cords. Associations were estimated through generalised estimating equations. Most injuries were superficial bruises (28%), cuts (28%), and abrasions (18%). Assessed the public health importance of injury in a representative sample of young people with intellectual disability relative to the general population. Carer report of medically attended injury to subjects was collected for the first time during 1996 (age 5–29 years) and supplemented with medical record in- jury data from hospitals and general practitioners for 147 of the ACAD sam- ple and 110 supplementary subjects. These data were compared with general population injury data to assess relative epidemiological differences. Findings showed that Falls were more common and transport injury and intentional in- jury less common causes of injury morbidity compared with general popu- lation. The patterns of cause, circumstances, and severity of injury in young 652 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN people with intellectual disability have more similarities with younger children than with their same age group in the general population. Compared the patterns of medically attended injuries between children with and without disabilities and explored the residential environment risks in five counties of Hubei Province in the People's Republic of China. One thousand two hundred and one children aged 1–14 with disabilities and 1201 their healthy counterparts matched as having the same gender, same age, and lived in the same neigh- bourhood were recruited and their injuries history were documented for twelve months. Children with disabilities had a significantly higher prevalence of injury than children without disabilities (10.2% vs. 4.4%; P < 0.001). The two groups differed significantly in terms of number of injury episodes, injury place and ac- tivity at time of injury. Falls leading to cuts were the leading mechanism of injury regardless of disability status. Social interaction is noted relevant for children with special education needs de- velopment. Empirical study has shown that emotional and social development is important to the learning success of children. Lev Vygotsky, a seminal the- orist and social constructivist, underscored the essence of creating meaningful social platforms for interaction throughout a child's development. His study re- vealed that children with special educational needs benefit greatly from peer and adult interaction. Vygotsky stated, "children with difficulties should be included as much as possible in the regular activities of the primary culture" (Berk and Winsler, 1995, p. 83). Children interacting among themselves cordially is also found to improve children social and emotional development (Pellegrini and Blatchford, 2000). Further, children's social and emotional adaptation and their bonding to prosocial peers and adults may further contribute to their motivation for learning (Zins et al., 2004, p. 78). Children who develop positive relationships with others may experience higher self-esteem and motivation in school. When the experiences at school are positive, a child will want to wake up every morning excited and ready to participate in learning. Through peer interaction, children are developing skills necessary for academic success. In Ghana, the implementation of inclusive education is well embraced (Gyimah, 2010; Hayford, 2013). Moreover, in Ghana, the Persons with Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715), the Government of Ghana (2000) and the Government of Ghana (1992) indicate that children with disabilities should not be discrim- inated against or substantially disadvantaged by educational institutions. Therefore, these educational institutions need to make the needed adjustments © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 653 to meet the needs of the children. Evidence in some advanced countries show that most schools practicing inclusive education fail to provide adequate struc- tures and school environment that facilitate mobility and safe living for per- sons with disability (Ramirez et al., 2004; Gaebler-Spira, 2011). However, in Ghana not much is known regarding the issue of safe structures and safe living among persons with disability in our basic schools. This is because the atten- tion of Ghanaian researchers has been focused on the practice of inclusive education (Gadagbui, 2008; Agbenyega and Deku, 2011; Vanderpuye, 2013), problems with the implementation of inclusive education (Avoke and Avoke, 2004; Alhassan and Abosi, 2014) as well as teachers' preparedness for the in- clusive agenda (Nketsia et al., 2016) with less regard to the safety living for children with disability in the inclusive basic schools in Ghana. The situation is more urgent for Central Region since the region habour majority of the inclu- sive schools in Ghana. This study, therefore, sought to fill this knowledge gap by investigating the safety conditions for children with disabilities in Ghana inclusive basic schools. Objectives of the study The study was conducted with the following specific objectives in mind: Examine the accessibility of the built environment to children with disabilities. Explore the social atmosphere that exist in inclusive basic schools in Ghana. Investigate the types of injuries sustained by persons with disabilities in in- clusive schools. Research methods Descriptive cross-sectional design was adopted for the study because the whole idea for the investigation was to uncover current safety conditions of inclusive schools within the Central Region of Ghana. The choice of Central Region was born out of the idea that Central Region contains most of the inclusive schools being piloted in Ghana, hence the need for a thorough assessment of environmental safety issues within these schools. The study targeted 14 Basic inclusive public schools within Central Region. In selecting the schools, the purposive sampling method was used to select all the 14 inclusive schools. This method was used because the study revolved around inclusive schools within Central Region only. Basic school teachers who 654 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN were to serve as the respondents of the study were estimated to be 330 in number. The response rate was, however, 80% representing 264. Due to the expected compre- hensiveness and the desire to get accurate description of happenings regarding safety issues within the inclusive schools, the researcher decided to use the entire popula- tion (census) since they were relatively smaller in size (Leedy and Ormrod, 2005). Safety perception questionnaire was designed based on literature. The questionnaire had two dimensions. The first dimension had seven items that measured accessibility of the built environment. The second dimension also had 10 items that measured how the built environment should be designed. The instrument was pilot-tested among 30 inclusive school teachers purposely to fine tune the items. All ethical protocols such as informed consent, confidentiality of data and holding respondents and other relevant context anonymous were strictly adhered to. Respondents were given a thor- ough briefing about the purpose and relevance of the study. The researcher used six weeks for the entire data collection. This was made possible because the researcher trained other four graduate students as research assistants to help in the data col- lection. Finally, data on research questions 1 and 3 were analysed using mean and standard deviation. However, data on research question 2 were analysed using a pie- chart diagram. Results of the study The data were collected with Children with Disability Environmental Safety Questionnaire (CDESQ), which is a 29-item questionnaire scored on a 4-point Likert type of scale. The questionnaire ranged from Strongly Agree (4), Agree (3), Disagree (2) and Strongly Disagree (1). For purposes of interpretation, the cut-off point scores were 1.0–1.4 (Strongly Disagree), 1.5–2.4 (Disagree), 2.5– 3.4 (Agree) and 3.5–4.0 (Strongly Agree). Objective 1 Examine the accessibility of the built environment to children with disabilities. The focus of this objective was to bring to the fore the nature of physical envi- ronment of inclusive basic schools in Ghana, whether or not they are accessible to persons with special educational needs. Table 1 provides a summary of the analysis of this objective. Results from Table 1 show that some aspects of the built environment for the sampled inclusive schools are appropriate whereas others are not. For example, © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 655 Table 1. Accessibility of built environment Statements M SD The school compound is distant from a highway or main lorry road 3.4 0.98 The school is well fenced or walled to prevent children from moving outside the school indiscriminately 3.2 0.79 The school buildings are accessible to the deaf, blind and partially sighted and people with physical impairments 3.0 0.60 All staircase in the school allows for easy movement of children with disability 3.2 0.77 There are ramps for wheelchair users 2.1 0.90 The recreational or playgrounds are firm and slip resistant 1.5 0.52 All classroom and non-classroom doors are accessible to children with disability 1.2 0.93 Desks used by pupils are the type that is disability friendly 3.2 0.88 Arrangement of seats allows for easy movement of children with disability 2.7 0.85 Places of convenience in the school are appropriate (i.e. water closet) are easily accessible by children with disability 1.0 0.97 Veranda floor in the school is disability friendly and not slippery 1.2 0.68 School compound is kept tidy to protect children with disability 2.6 0.92 Mean of means/Average SD 2.4 0.82 Source: Field Data, 2020. respondents (inclusive school teachers) agreed (M = 3.4, SD = 0.98) that their school compounds are distant from highway or main lorry road. Again, re- spondents agreed (M = 3.2, SD = 0.79) that their schools are fenced or walled for protection. Further, respondents admitted (M = 3.2, SD = 0.77) that all staircases in their schools allow for easy movement of children with special educational needs. However, most aspects of the environment were not appro- priate. Respondents disagreed (M = 2.1, SD = 0.90) that schools have ramps to support wheelchair users. Again, respondents disagreed (M = 1.5, SD = 0.52) that recreational or playgrounds are firm and slip resistant. On the issue about 'all classroom and non-classroom doors are accessible to children with disabil- ity,' they disagreed (M = 1.2, SD = 0.93). Respondents (M = 1.2, SD = 0.68) again disagreed that their schools' veranda floors are disability friendly and not slippery. Finally, they disagreed (M = 1.0, SD = 0.97) to the issue of places of convenience in the school are appropriate (i.e. water closet) and are easily accessible to children with disability. 656 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN Responses pointed to the direction that some aspects of the built environment such as, the staircase, the schools' compounds being distant from roads and the schools' buildings were appropriate. However, other aspects of the built environ- ment such as ramps, playgrounds, classroom and non-classroom doors, places of convenience and veranda were not appropriate, hence, not accessible to children with special educational needs. This assertion is shown by the mean of mean score of 2.4 and the standard deviation score of 0.82 showing homogeneity of responses. Objective 2 Explore the social atmosphere in inclusive basic schools in Ghana. This objec- tive focused basically on the social environment of the inclusive basic schools in Ghana. Table 2 gives a summary of the results. The results of Table 2 reveal that the social atmosphere in the selected inclusive schools is good and therefore acceptable. This is shown by the mean of means (M = 2.7, SD = 0.67). The average standard deviation of 0.67 also shows that the inclusive school teachers' responses were homogenous in form. For purposes of elaboration, the teachers (M = 3.6, SD = 0.98) agreed that their schools have a policy to minimise all forms of discrimination. It is also seen that (M = 3.4, Table 2. Social atmosphere in inclusive schools Statements M SD Cases of bullying are often reported to teachers in the school 3.4 0.80 The relationship between teachers and persons with special educational needs and disabilities has always been cordial Children without disabilities relate positively with persons with special educa- tional needs and disabilities 3.4 0.75 3.2 0.56 Everyone is made to feel welcome in the school 3.2 0.90 Pupil-pupil relationship is cordial 3.2 0.63 Teachers relate cordially and respectfully with pupils with disabilities 3.1 0.92 All children are equally valued 3.0 0.78 The school has a policy to minimise all forms of discrimination 3.6 0.98 Children know who to turn to if they are bullied 3.2 0.87 Classroom furniture (tables and chairs) is comfortable for all learners 3.0 0.79 Mean of means/Average SD 2.7 0.67 Source: Field Data, 2020. © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 657 SD = 0.80) of the respondents indicated that cases of bullying in their schools are always reported to them. Respondents (M = 3.4, SD = 0.75) also reported that the relationship between teachers and persons with disability has always been cordial in the schools. Again, respondents (M = 3.2, SD = 0.56) agreed that children with- out disability and their counterpart with disability relate well. Finally, respondents (M = 3.0, SD = 0.78) agreed that all children are equally valued in the school. Objective 3 Investigate the types of injuries sustained by persons with disabilities in inclusive schools. On this objective, the study sought to bring to the fore common injuries sustained by persons with special educational needs. Figure 1 shows summary of the analysis. Figure 1 results show that within the inclusive schools that were selected for the study, 48% of the injuries sustained by persons with special educational needs were 'Bruises/Pinches'. This is followed by 'Cuts/Laceration' which represents 20% of all injuries sustained by the children with SEN. The results Figure 1. Type of injuries. Source: Field Data, 2020. [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com] 658 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN show further that 'Abrasion wound' appears to be pervasive among children with SEN. This type of injury takes 10% of the total injury sustained by children with special educational needs and disabilities in inclusive schools. Punctures and unspecified wounds were also recorded to happen among the children with special educational needs and disability (SEND) but at a min- imal percentage (i.e. 9% each). Finally, among all the injuries sustained by children with SEND, 'Bleeding', happened to be less frequent. This takes only 4% of the cases of injuries. The findings as shown by Figure 1 have implication for safety policy framework within inclusive schools not only in the Central Region but also Ghana as a whole. Discussion The main thrust of the study was to examine accessibility of the built environ- ment in inclusive schools in Ghana. The findings revealed that most aspects of the built environment, such as play grounds, classroom and non-classroom doors, places of convenience and veranda were inappropriate, hence not acces- sible to children with special educational needs. Ramirez et al.'s. (2004) found that creating school facilities that are accessible to children with special edu- cational needs remains a challenge for most institutions. Studies suggest that inappropriateness of staircases, veranda, toilet, urinal and open doors among others worsen the plight of children with special education needs by further exposing them to injuries (Pugh and Chitiyo, 2012; Llewellyn et al., 2016). If the children are to stay in school and achieve academic success, it will require governments to take steps to improve the school environment to make them accessible to all children. It is only through this that Goal 10 of the 2016–2030 agenda for Sustainable Development Goals can be achieved. In Goal 10, ef- forts are to be made to reduce inequalities in order not to leave anyone behind. The findings of this study become relevant to provide empirical data for policy engagement within Ghana and beyond. Additionally, it was discovered that the social atmosphere in the selected inclusive schools was generally welcoming. The finding has implication for social and emo- tional development of children with special educational needs. If the development of every child can be safeguarded, much will depend on how safe the school envi- ronment is. It therefore behoves classroom teachers to cultivate cordial relationship with their pupils. The stronger the relationship, the better their learning. In this case, children are more likely to gain social competence in terms of the relationship © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 659 others have with them. It will therefore mean that both the school and the home, that is teachers and parents make the conscious effort to interact positively with children with special needs. Cordial interaction between teachers and children has been found to improve children's social and emotional development (Pellegrini and Blatchford, 2000; Pellegrini, 2002). Children's social and emotional adaptation and bonding to friends and teachers may further contribute to their motivation and learning (Zins et al., 2004). Cordial relationship at school can serve as a motivating factor for children always to be in school in order to see their friends. Further, the study revealed that various forms of injuries are prevalent among inclusive schools in Ghana. Notable among them were bruises/pinches, cuts/lac- erations, and abrasions. As found in this study, Ramirez et al. (2004) and Zhu et al. (2012) report that common physical injuries that persons with SEND sustain on school campuses include bruises, cuts and abrasions. With the universal target of recording less or no injury in inclusive schools, it is quite alarming that injuries are still prevailing in the inclusive schools. The finding corroborates other find- ings in the literature that children with intellectual disability experience harms at school, both intentional and unintentional (Hoskin, 2010; Caldas and Bensy, 2014). Some of the harm occur because of their exposure to improper built school infrastructure. The prevalence of injuries sustained by persons with special ed- ucational needs in our inclusive schools point out that the built environment is not disability friendly which must be given serious attention. It will therefore be expedient for scholars to continue to talk about it for improvement particularly as societies move towards greater inclusion. Conclusions Based on the findings of the study, it is worth concluding that if Goal 10 of the Sustainable Development Goals 2016–2030 can be achieved, it will depend on State institutions removing all barriers to child learning. Inclusive education is more likely to succeed if pragmatic steps are taken to improve the safety of all children including those with special educational needs and disabilities in schools. Implications for prevention The following measures may be implemented as baseline preventive measures for school safety: 660 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN In educating children with SEND, ways of children's transition into society must be emphasised. On this note, children with SEND should be taught how to navigate their school environment safely especially those with visual impairment. They have to be given orientation and mobility training to enable them to manage the physical environment in school and their communities. More important, educational authorities should ensure that the built environment is safe for all children. Inclusive classroom walls and playground should be designed with cushion edges and surfaces since most of the injuries sustained by the children with SEND are caused by hard surfaces at school. Protective clothes that take overall cover should also be won by children with SEND, especially those that have high hyperactive characteristics to mitigate school time injuries. Recommendations The following recommendations are offered for policy and practice: The Government of Ghana through the Ministry of Education, non- governmental organisations (NGO's), parent-teacher association groups (PTA) should be actively engaged in ensuring that physical facilities such as portable door locks, functional places of convenience (e.g. water closet), veranda and playground of inclusive schools are built appro- priately to reduce injuries among children with SEND and to promote accessibility. School authorities such as the Special Education Division should organise regular in-service sensitisation programmes on the role teachers can play in building and fostering positive social environment. Once teachers are ready to interact with children with special educational needs and disabilities, it will build their confidence and self-esteem and promote their interest in school. It is imperative for researchers in the field of special education to give more attention to safety issues in inclusive schools. As more information emerge, it will help schools to identify what needs to be done to promote school safety. More important, the need will arise for government to develop and imple- ment appropriate educational policies that will safeguard safety in school for all children. © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 661 References AGBENYEGA, J. and DEKU, P. (2011) Building new identities in teacher preparation for inclusive education in Ghana. Current Issues in Education, 14, 1. ALHASSAN, A. R. K. and ABOSI, O. C. (2014) Teacher effectiveness in adapting instruction to the needs of pupils with learning difficulties in regular primary schools in Ghana. Sage Open, 4, 1. AVOKE, M. K. and AVOKE, S. K. (2004) Inclusion, Rehabilitation and Transition Services in Special Education. Winneba: Special Education Books. BERK, L. A. and WINSLER, A. (1995) Schaffolding Children's Learning: Vygotsky and Early Childhood Education. Washington, DC: NAEYC. BRIGGS, F. and HAWKINS, R. (2005) Personal safety issues in the lives of children with learning disabilities. Children Australia, 30, 2, 19–27. CALDAS, S. J. and BENSY, M. L. (2014) The sexual maltreatment of children with disabilities in American school settings. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 23, 4, 345–366. GADAGBUI, G. Y. (2008) Inclusive Education Project. Winneba: University of Education. GAEBLER-SPIRA, D. (2011) Overview of sensorimotor dysfunction in cerebral palsy. Topics in Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation, 17, 1, 50–53. GOODLEY, D. and RUNSWICK-COLE, K. (2011) Problematising policy: conceptions of 'child', 'disabled' and 'parents' in social policy in England. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 15 1, 71–85. GOVERNMENT OF GHANA (1992) Constitution of the Republic of Ghana. Accra: GoG. GOVERNMENT OF GHANA (2000) Ghana National Disability Policy. Accra: GoG. GYIMAH, E. K. (2010) An Examination of Teachers' Use of Instructional Strategies in Primary Schools in Ghana: Implication to Inclusive Education. Cape Coast, Ghana: Department of Educational Foundations, University of Cape Coast. HAYFORD, S. (2013) Special Educational Needs and Quality for All. Winneba: Department of Special Education. HOSKIN, C. (2010) Eliciting the Views of Disabled Young People on Friendship and Belonging: Authentic Voices for Action Research Engaging Schools in Change Towards Social Inclusion. Thesis, Doctor of Educational, Child and Community Psychology, University of Exeter. LEEDY, P. D. and ORMROD, J. E. (2013) Practical Research Planning and Design (10th edition). Boston: Merril/Prentice. LLEWELLYN, G., WAYLAND, S. & HINDMARSH, G. (2016) Disability and Child Sexual Abuse in Institutional Context. Sydney: Royal. Sydney: Commonwealth of Australia commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse. MACARTHUR, J. (2012) Sustaining friendships, relationships, and rights at school. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 17, 8, 1–19. MEPHAM, S. (2010) Disabled children: the right to feel safe. Child Care in Practice, 16, 1, 19–34. NKETSIA, W., SALOVIITA, T. and GYIMAH, E. K. (2016) Teacher educators' views on inclusive education and teacher preparation in Ghana. International Journal of Whole Schooling, 12, 2, 1–18. PELLEGRINI, A. D. (2002) Bullying, victimization, and sexual harassment during the transition to middle school. Educational Psychologist, 37, 3, 151–163. PELLEGRINI, A. D. and BLATCHFORD, P. (2000) The Child at School: Interactions with Peers and Teachers. London: Arnold. PUGH, R. and CHITIYO, M. (2012) The problem of bullying in schools and the promise of positive behaviour supports. Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 12, 2, 47–53. 662 Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 © 2021 NASEN RAMIREZ, M., PEEK-ASA, C. and KRAUS, J. F. (2004) Disability and risk of school related injury. Injury Prevention, 10, 1, 21–26. SALMON, N. (2013) We just stick together: how disabled teens negotiate stigma to create lasting friendship. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 54, 4, 347–358. SLOPER, P. & BERESFORD, B. (2014) Children who have disabilities. In G. B. Melton, A. Ben- Arieh, J. Cashmore, C. S. Goodman and N. K. Worley (eds), The SAGE Handbook of Child Research pp. 245–265. London: SAGE. SNYDER, S. L. (2002) Infinities of forms: disability figures in artistic traditions. Enabling the Humanities, 4, 2, 173–196. STALKER, K. and MCARTHUR, K. (2012) Child abuse, child protection and disabled children: a review of recent research. Child Abuse Review, 21, 1, 24–40. UNICEF OFFICE OF RESEARCH (2013) Measuring child well-being in rich countries: A compara- tive overview, Innocenti Report Card 11. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research. VANDERPUYE, I. (2013) Piloting Inclusive Education in Ghana: Parental Perceptions, Expectations and Involvement. Unpublished Doctoral Thesis. University of Leeds, United Kingdom. XIANG, J., BI, P., PISANIELLO, D., et al. (2014) Association between high temperature and work-related injuries in Adelaide, South Australia, 2001–2010. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 71, 246–52. ZINS, J. E., WEISSBERG, R. P., WANG, M. C. and WALBERG, H. J. (2004) Building Academic Success on Social and Emotional Learning: What Does the Research Say?. New York: Teachers College Press. Correspondence Directorate of Academic Planning and Quality Assurance (DAPQA) University of Cape Coast Cape Coast Ghana Email: egyimah@ucc.edu.gh Gyimah Emmanuel Kofi, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of Education and Psychology, University of Cape Coast. His research interests are in assessment practices for children with disabilities, disability studies, inclusive education studies © 2021 NASEN Support for Learning Volume 36 Number 4 2021 663