ITU A"Z Vol 19 No 3 November 2022 569-583 Using geographic information systems to study the impact of the built environment on social inclusion of people with physical disabilities: The case of Amman Nadeen ABDELDAYEM1, Raed AL TAL2, Anne GHARAIBEH3 1 n.ad@yahoo.com Department of Architecture and Interior Architecture, Faculty of Architecture and Built Environment, German Jordanian University, Amman, Jordan raedaltal@yahoo.com Department of Architecture and Interior Architecture, Faculty of Architecture and Built Environment, German Jordanian University, Amman, Jordan dr-anne@just.edu.jo Department of City planning and Design, Faculty of Architecture and Design, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Ramtha, Jordan Received: December 2020 Final Acceptance: April 2021 Abstract This research explores the relationship between the built environment and social inclusion of adults with physical disabilities in the city of Amman, the capital of Jordan, using GIS (Geographic Information Systems). GIS is overlapped with the survey data to identify the built environment predictors (independent variables) and social inclusion indicators (dependent variables). The study hypothesized that the income level has a significant impact on all indicators of social inclusion. Multivariate Logistic Regression analysis is used to measure the influence of the built environment predictors including income level, residential density, land use mix, and variety of destinations on the three indicators of social inclusion: physical independence, occupation, and communal and social activities. The results of the study indicate that living conditions in neighborhoods with higher economic status, more land use mix, and more destinations are positively associated with social inclusion; while the high-compacted residential density has a negative impact on social inclusion. The results also indicate that there are other significant factors that negatively affect social inclusion such as attitudinal, physical, and transportation barriers. The findings of this research can be used as a basic material in the development of disability policies to improve social services and provide an entire social inclusion for people with physical disabilities. Keywords Built environment predictors, Geographic Information Systems, Jordan, Physical disabilities, Social inclusion indicators. Introduction According to the World Health Organization (WHO) and The World Bank (2011), there are over one billion, or around 15 %, of the world population living with a disability. Globally, disability prevalence is usually higher in developing countries. People with disabilities are more likely to have experience adverse socioeconomic outcomes such as less education, poorer health outcomes, lower levels of employment, and higher poverty rates (The World Bank, 2018). In the last decade, Interest has increased in the issue of inclusion of people with disabilities in societies, and many authorities around the world are promoting "inclusive cities' strategies to meet their needs (UN, 2013). In 1980, WHO used the terms Im- pairment and Handicap to refer to disability (WHO, 1980). It defined dis- ability as any limitation or problem in body function or structure that pre- vent the performance of an activity in the time lapse considered normal for a human being (WHO, 2011). In 2011, WHO and the World Bank produced a broader definition of disability to cover impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions. Similarly, the United Nations Con- vention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and Crabtree (2013) defined disability as a result of the interaction between persons with impairments and environmental barri- ers that hinders their full participation in society on an equal level with others (UN, 2007). Jordan was the first country in the Middle East to adopt national legisla- tion for disability and signed the CRPD in 2008, which established a set of ob- ligations at the international and na- tional levels. Consequently, The Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (HCD) developed disabil- ity legislation to adapt CRPD's articles and released a new law on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in cooperation with different stakeholders in 2017. "The new legislation perceives those with disabilities in a new way by adopting a definition of disability that takes into ac- count the physical barriers that hinder their ability to lead a normal life," said Muhannad Azzeh, the secretary general of the Higher Council for People with Disabilities (Azzeh, 2017). Despite the strong legislative base in Jordan that fo- cuses on social inclusion of people with disabilities in all life sectors, people with disabilities in Jordan are far less likely to be employed, educated and engaged in social activities. They are also more likely to live in poverty, be inactive and experience violence and bullying com- pared to people without disabilities Figure 1. Neighborhoods of Amman showing study samples (Data acquired from GAM archive, 2018). (Otoum et al., 2017). This research focuses on physical barriers and explores the relationship between the built environment features of neighborhoods and social inclusion of adults with physical disabilities in Amman as the most populous city and the capital of Jordan. Amman is admin- istered by the Greater Amman Munic- ipality (GAM) and covers 22 districts with a total of 167 neighborhoods. It has a population of 3.3 million and an average density of 9,800 persons/km² (DoS, 2017). The built-up area of Am- man has grown from 72 km² in 1983 to 144 km² in 1994 and 226 km² in 2005 and its area was doubled to 1,662 km² in 2007. Currently, GAM covered 800 km² (Ababsa, 2013). For the purpose of this research the neighborhoods of Amman were categorized into five groups based on area, population den- sity, date of establishment, number of people with disabilities, and poverty. Samples were selected from all neigh- borhoods to reach accurate results and comparison (Figure 1). This research gives an overview of the current situation of disability in Am- man. The results of this research will be useful for public institutions such as The Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (HCD), Great- er Amman Municipality (GAM), and Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MPWH) in developing disability in- clusion strategies and disability codes in Jordan. It will also provide a foun- dation for researchers on the existing conditions related to the physical envi- ronment and social inclusion of people with disabilities in similar contexts. The hypothesis of this research is that people with physical disabilities are living in Amman in neighborhoods of high residential density; low poverty rate; mixed land uses; many destina- tions are more likely to report optimal participation in society, and therefore higher social inclusion. The main ob- jective of this research is to explore the relationship between the built environ- ment predictors of neighborhoods and social inclusion indicators of people with physical disabilities. The sub ob- jectives are to analyze the current situ- ation of people with disabilities in Am- man in different sectors of life to define the reliable indicators of disability in- clusion in Amman along with the built environment predictors. It also aims to develop basic recommendations to pro- mote participation and social inclusion, and reduce the barriers, which oppress people with disabilities and exclude them from the society. Theory and methodology This section presents a thematic review of the literature that covers the social inclusion/exclusion. Inclusion as defined in the Oxford Dictionaries (2016) is "the action or state of including or of being included within a group or structure". United Nations (UN) and the World Bank have almost given the same definition of social inclusion as the process of improving the terms of participation in society for people who are disadvantaged because of their disability, through enhancing opportunities, access to resources, and improving their abilities. Social exclusion emerged in the 1970s as a response to maintain social cohesion and stability in society after the massive economic restructuring associated with transitioning from an agrarian to an urban society. This concept was spread internationally with efforts to integrate excluded groups in normal life activities such as social, economic, political, and cultural activities. Social exclusion describes a state in which individuals or groups are unable or prevented from participating in economic, social, political and cultural activities to the fullest extent they desire (Labonte et al., 2011). Theatrically speaking, social inclusion is a multidimensional process (Tas, 2015; Thomas et al., 2015). It can happen in multiple areas, different magnitudes, and different directions (Tas, 2015). The main aim of social inclusion as multidimensional process is to enable full and active participation of all society members (Thomas et al., 2015), and to remove economic, social and cultural boundaries between those who are included and excluded (Lombe, 2007). However, inclusion of people with disabilities into everyday activities requires practices and policies designed to identify and remove all kinds of barriers in order to achieve equality in societies and making sure everybody has the same opportunities to participate in every aspect of life to the best of their abilities and desires (Al Ju'beh, 2015). Al Ju'beh (2015) defined disabili- ty as a relationship between a person's impairment and his/her environment. Disability occurs when a person with impairment live in a place full of en- vironmental barriers, while inclusion achieved when a person with impair- ment live in accessible environment. Labonte and others (2011) reviewed several social exclusion/inclusion frameworks in order to identify exclu- sion indicators and measures that could be used for purposes of monitoring, policy and program development, and evaluation. This review led to the iden- tification of nine principle domains that capture processes of social exclusion/ inclusion: Employment and work, In- come and economic resources, Material resources, Education and skills, Health, Housing, Social resources, Community resources, Personal safety. Individuals with disabilities are vul- nerable to marginalization and exclu- sion from labor force due to their dis- ability, despite legislation intended to prevent their marginalization in most countries, and the academic achieve- ments, skills and training of many peo- ple with disabilities. Some employers avoid hiring people with disabilities be- cause they think that it will reduce pro- ductivity, create more accidents in the workplace, and increase the cost of their accommodation (Leslie, R., Leslie, K. & Murphy, M., 2003). People with disabilities face nega- tive attitudes in Jordan such as signs of pity, fear or staring, especially among children that prevent their in- clusion and negatively affect the per- son's participation in society (Jaber, 2012). They also imposed to a higher risk of being bullied, harassed and dis- criminated. Therefore, parents should play a more significant role in raising confidence and acceptance levels of their disable children. Schools should also increase the awareness of inclu- sion among students to avoid mis- treatment of disable students. Studies about disability in Jordan began in the 1960s. It focused on reha- bilitation services and providing insti- tutional (residential) care for severely deaf and "mentally retarded" people (Turmusani, 1999). In the 1970s, gov- ernmental and voluntary organizations began to be more involved in the west- ern-style institutional provision for peo- ple with mental disabilities. Public insti- tutions and NGOs conduct most of the disability research in Jordan. Limited researches had discussed the inclusion of the disable people with in society. In addition, most of the researchers focus on rehabilitation, legislation, education, and other social aspects more than ac- cessibility and social inclusion. Most of books and research papers about the inclusion of people with dis- abilities in Jordan have been focused on inclusion in the educational sector. In general they did not address social inclusion in other fields such as em- ployment or social activities. However, almost no research has been done on the association between the built environ- ment characteristics and social inclusion of people with disabilities in Jordan. Government-produced official statis- tics is the most obvious source of doc- umentary data for research purposes. National census and various reports de- tailing demographic, social, economic, business, and political trends are forms of the official statistics (Henn, M. , Wein- stein, M., & Foard 2009). In Jordan, such a useful data are collected and produced by the Department of Statistics (DoS) which provides general data about the number of people with disabilities ac- cording to their type of disability, gen- der, and governorate. However, there are no specified analytical studies about the relationship between disability and the built environment produced in this regard, except the study about employ- ment and unemployment of people with disabilities, which was published in 2010 in cooperation with the HCD. For example, the latest national census (2015) by DoS indicates that percentage of people with functional difficulties is about 11% of the total population above five year age. While the prevalence of severe disabilities only among the same age group is 2.7% and is higher than it was in 2004 and 1994 (1.2% for both). The percentage of people with disabili- ties in Jordan is relatively low compared to the international percentage, which is Table 1. Number of people living in Amman aged (5 years and above) and facing difficulties in body functions by type of difficulty and severity (Source: DoS, 2015). Figure 2. Prevalence of disability in the neighborhoods of Amman (Data acquired from DoS archive, 2015). 15%. Other census data indicates that il- literate people constitute 9.1% of Jordan population aged 13 years and above, while they constitute 22.4% of people with disabilities in the same age group. It was also reported that economically inactive people constitute 53% of Jor- dan population aged 15 years and more, while they constitute 82.2% of people with disabilities in the same age group (DoS, 2015). These numbers indicate that many people with disabilities have been excluded from mainstream educa- tion and work opportunities. They are also more likely to be inactive in com- parison to people without disabilities. The census categorized difficulties under six types, each type has three cat- egories of difficulty based on its severity. Table 1 shows number of people living in Amman aged (5 years and above) and facing difficulties in body functions by type of difficulty and severity. Func- tional difficulties relating to the ability to walk or climb up stairs and the abil- ity to see were the most prevalent dif- ficulties with a percentage of 23% and 31%, respectively. While those relating to self-care and the ability to communi- cate with others were less so, with 10% and 8% respectively. It also shows peo- ple with moderate and severe physical difficulties constitute about 47,160 per- sons with a percentage of 1.31% of Am- man Governorate's population aged five years and above. Figure 2 presents the prevalence of disability in Amman's neighborhoods. Number of people with disabilities is higher in low-income neighborhoods than in middle and high-income neigh- borhoods. About 93 neighborhoods in Amman (which constitute 56% of the total neighborhoods in Amman) have a higher disability percentage than the global rate, which is 15% (WHO, 2011). Rehabilitation services for people with disabilities have been initiated in Jordan in the wake of war and conflict that increased the number of people with conflict-related impairments in the country (Turmusani, 1999). Dis- ability-related provision began in the 1960s and was led by foreign NGOs that provided institutional and resi- dential care for people with disabilities. Jordan has become the focus of inter- national attention and foreign aid af- ter the displacement of refugees from other countries in the region (Turmu- sani, 1999), including Palestinians who fled to Jordan from conflict in the West Bank, especially in 1948 and 1976 and from the Gulf War in 1990 and 1991, and lately Syrians who fled to Jordan after the Syrian conflict in the past nine years. With the start of the Syrian cri- sis, Jordan witnessed an increase in the number of people with disabilities as about 30% of Syrian refugees in Jordan have physical or intellectual disability (Dupire, 2018) Data collection methods This research involves collecting, analyzing and integrating quantitative data (e.g., experiments, surveys) and qualitative data (e.g., focus groups, interviews). A mixed method approach is usually used for consequence- oriented and problem-centered research (Creswell, 2014), which makes it suitable for this research. An embedded sequential mixed methods design used in this study as a procedure for collecting, analyzing quantitative and qualitative data sequentially to understand the research problem. Qualitative data plays a secondary or supportive role to the quantitative data. Qualitative data supports and provides additional information to the quantitative data which plays a primary form in this research. The questionnaires were published online on social media and disability-related websites. Online questionnaires are relatively cheap to administer, and they save time and effort and enable coverage of the whole area of Amman. In addition, online questionnaires have the advantage of ensuring a degree of privacy for people with disabilities because of avoiding direct personal contact. The questionnaire survey has a simple rating or (Yes/No) answers, with minimum open-ended questions. Closed questions are easily asked, easily understood, and easily answered and coded for analysis. The interviews were conducted at two stages, the first was unstructured interviews that were conducted along with the literature review to highlight the disability situation in Amman and understand problems of disability and inclusion. The second was semi-struc- tured interviews that contained ques- tions that are more detailed. This study considers questions of inclusion of people with disabilities in the society, so some respondents might offer the 'socially acceptable' response – the an- swer that they believe the interviewer wants to know. Target group and sampling method The target group is people with severe physical disabilities (wheelchair users), and people with moderate physical disabilities who have limited walking abilities and use assistive devices such as walkers, prostheses, and crutches. According to the last census report by the DoS in 2015, people with moderate and severe physical difficulties constitute about 47,160 persons with a percentage 1.31% of Amman Governorate's aged five years Figure 3. Prevalence of people with physical disability in the neighborhoods of Amman (A) Prevalence of people with all types of physical disability (B) Prevalence of people with moderate and severe physical disability. and more. The variation between the international percentages of persons with disabilities and the national disability percentage is related to many reasons such as the societal perspective that drives people to hide the existence of disabilities in their families; the difference in the definition and the classification of disability in Jordan; and using traditional weak methods in surveys (HCAPD, 2010) (Figure 3). Based on sample size equation (1), if we assume that confidence level is 90%, Margin of error is 5%, and the popu- lation is 40,523, then the sample size needed is approximately 250 persons. Where: z = z-score (the number of standard deviations a given proportion is away from the mean) p = Standard of deviation e = Margin of error (percentage in decimal form) N = Population size The sample was selected from 70 neighborhoods of Amman, taking into consideration the diversity of the characteristics of the neighborhoods in terms of area, population density, date of establishment, the percentage of people with disabilities, and income level. About 50% of these neighbor- hoods have less than two kilometers of area, which means that walking dis- tance from the neighborhood center to its edge does not exceed 800 m. The sample was selected from neigh- borhoods with various population densities, with an average of 9,800 per- sons/km². Population density in Am- man's central neighborhoods such as Al-Hashmi Al-Shamali, Jabal Al-Nuzha and Al-Ashrafieh is over 30,000 per- sons/km² with a maximum of 47,371 person/km², which is among the high- est urban densities in the world. Most of the neighborhoods with low pop- ulation densities are scattered at the edges of Amman such as Al-Hummar and Al-Murouj with a minimum of two persons/km². The sample of the research was se- lected from different neighborhoods in terms of income level. The income level was divided into four categories: poor, low, middle and high. The map clearly shows the line that divides East and West Amman. Amman suffer from high social segregation, high- ly populated neighborhoods where unemployment rates are high, and neighborhoods primarily located in the west, where employment is higher, education is better, and buildings and infrastructure are better and more de- veloped. East Amman covers Amman's historical center and more than half of the city with its North and South ex- pansions, while West Amman extends from Jabal Amman to Dabouq. Neigh- borhoods of high poverty rates include most of the informal houses that grew up after the arrival of Palestinian refu- gees in 1967 from the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Most of these houses were built on the fringes of the official refu- gee camps (Ababsa, 2013). Measures of dependent and independent variables Identifying the dependent variables: Social inclusion indicators A systematic approach was adopted in the selection of social inclusion indicators. This involved a review of the literature and their theoretical review in developing the measuring approaches, and the selection of a most relevant and robustness indicators that can be applied in the Jordanian context and related to disability. In addition to the literature review, interviews with people with disabili- ties explained what inclusion means to them. Asking them about the meaning of exclusion areas from their point of view helped in choosing the inclusion indicators. Most of the interviewees pointed out that the places of education and work are the most difficult places to integrate. They also have difficulties in accessing community services and participation in social activities. Using the indicator evaluation cri- teria, suitable social inclusion indica- tors for people with disabilities had been developed. Defining inclusion indicators is one of the research ob- jectives, first, an extensive list of in- dicators was created, and then a small number of core indicators was iden- tified to be realistic in term of their potential use, and compatible with the research content. Following the review of the liter- ature on social inclusion and inter- views with people with disabilities, three main indicators are proposed to be adopted as the following: Occupation: Which includes ac- cess to the formal labor market (Em- ployment) and/or access to educa- tional opportunities (Education). Communal and social activities: Participation in communal activities and social relationships including community services, recreation and leisure, and family gathering. Physical independence: Autono- my in mobility and daily activities. Identifying the independent variables: Built environment predictors Built environment predictors were created the same way as the inclusion indicators using a systematic approach. An extensive list of built environment predictors was created after reviewing the literature and choosing the most compatible predictors with the content of the research and the Jordanian built environment. Residential density, land use mix, and number and variety of destinations (Includes entertainment, landmarks, retail and religious locations) were the most frequent variables in different research. Income level as a predictor was added by the author to be compatible with research requirements whereas disability is much related to poverty, especially in the developing countries. Analyses and discussion To test the relationship between the four-built environment predictors (independent variables) and the three inclusion indicators (dependent variables), two types of models could be used: Logit Model or Probit Model. Both methods lay under similar, though not identical, inferences. Logit Model (or Logistic Regression Model) is more popular in this type of research because coefficients can be interpreted in terms of odds ratios, and it was widely used in the past literature. In return, the Profit Model is used in more advanced econometric settings and hence are used in some contexts by economists and political scientists (Albright, 2015). For these reasons, Multivariate Logistic Regression analysis is implemented in this study using SAS software. Supportive data from interviews with experts and decision makers along with open- ended questions in the questionnaire were analyzed by descriptive data Table 2. Results of independent variables showing main characteristics of built environment predictors of the 74 neighborhoods in Amman where the participants live, (Source: Researchers, 2019). Table 3. Results of dependent variables showing main catachrestic of social inclusion indicators for 250 participants of the study. analysis method. Main characteristics of survey par- ticipants are: The survey sample consisted of 250 persons. Approximately 57% of respondents are male, while 43% are female. The majority of respondents are Jordanian, amounting up to 92.5%. Approximately 20.5% of respon- dents aged 15 years or older are educa- tionally literate, at a less than secondary level education, and 71% are education- ally literate at higher than secondary level education. About 5.4% are illiter- ate, while 4% can read and write. Approximately 63.9% of respon- dents are employed, while 45.6% are unemployed and 17.5% economically inactive. The percentage of employed male respondents is approximately 63% of total employed respondents, while their female counterparts stood at approxi- mately 36%. The percentage of unemployed male respondents is approximately 66% of total unemployed respondents, while their female counterparts stood at ap- proximately 34%. Impact of the built environment on social inclusion Analyzing the built environment predictors (independent variables) The independent variables include income level, population density, land use mix, and percentage of destinations. Data about land use and destinations was obtained from GAM as GIS maps, while population density was obtained from DoS. Recent data about poverty and income is not published yet by DoS and the latest report was in 2010, so the income level was obtained from the Atlas of Jordan (2013). Table 2 summarizes the result of independent variables of the 74 neighborhoods. Analyzing the social inclusion indicators (dependent variables) Social inclusion indicators (dependent variables) were obtained from a structured questionnaire including occupation, physical independence, and communal and social activities. Questions about work and education are used as an indicator of occupation, while questions about the degree of independence in movement indicate whether a person is independent in movement or not. Indirect questions about the level of difficulty doing specific activities were asked to determine whether a person did most social activities without difficulty. Table 3 summarizes the result of de- pendent variables for the 250 partici- pants. People with physical disabilities are less likely to participate in communal and social activities. Around 37% of the respondents do not face any prob- lem or face mild problems in partici- pating in most of the daily life activi- ties, while 63% of them face moderate to severe problems. About 44% of the respondents face difficulty in partici- pating in society due to people's nega- tive attitudes. Impact of built environment predictors on social inclusion Multivariate Logistic Regression Method was used to test the relationships between the four built environment predictors and the three Table 4. Odds ratio estimates showing the impact of the built environment predictors on social inclusion. Table 5. Odds ratio estimates showing the impact of the built environment predictors on physical independence. Table 6. Odds Ratio Estimates showing the impact of the built environment predictors on occupation. inclusion domains separately at a neighborhood scale. The results are summarized and reported in Table 4. Table 4 gives the coefficients as odds ratios. An odds ratio is the exponenti- ated coefficient and can be interpreted as the multiplicative change in the odds for a one unit change in the predictor variable. Odds ratio over 1.00 indicates a positive relationship between inde- pendent and dependent variables, while the odds ratio less than 1.00 indicates a negative relationship between them. Impact of built environment predictors on physical independence Table 5 shows the coefficients (Point Estimate), the Wald Chi-Square statistic, and associated p-values. The chi-square test statistics and associated P-values indicate that the coefficients for income level and population density are statistically significant at 95% confidence level, while the odd ratios of number of destinations and land use mix are not statistically significant. The result of the impact of built environment predictors on physical independence indicates a positive association with income level and negative association with population density as the following: For a one category increase in in- come level, the odds of being physical- ly independent increase by a factor of 1.32. Therefore, for people with disabil- ities getting the highest income level, the odds of being physically indepen- dent is 1.32 times as large as the ones getting the lowest income level being physically independent. For a one level increase in popu- lation density, the odds of being physi- cally independent decrease by a factor of 0.75. Therefore, for people with dis- abilities living in high-density neigh- borhoods, the odds of being physically independent is 0.75 times less than the ones living in low-density neighbor- hoods being physically independent. Table 7. Odds Ratio Estimates showing the impact of the built environment predictors on communal and social activities. Impact of built environment predictors on occupation Table 6 shows the coefficients (labeled Estimate), the Wald Chi-Square statistic, and associated P-values. The chi-square test statistics and associated P-values indicate that the coefficients for income level, population density, number of destinations, and land use mix are statistically significant at 95% confidence level. The result of the impact of built environment predictors on occupation indicates a positive association with income level, number of destinations, and land use mix, and negative association with population density as the following: For a one category increase in in- come level, the odds of experience of full occupational activity increase by a factor of 4.12. Therefore, for people with disabilities getting the highest income level, the odds of experience of full oc- cupational activity is 4.12 times as large as the ones getting the lowest income level. For a one level increase in popu- lation density the odds of experience of full occupational activity decrease by a factor of 0.88. Therefore, for people with disabilities living in high density neighborhoods, the odds of experience of full occupational activity is 0.88 times less than the ones living in low density neighborhoods. For a one category increase in number and variety of destinations, the odds of experience of full occupa- tional activity increase by a factor of 1.19. Therefore, for people with disabil- ities living in neighborhoods with high number and variety of destinations, the odds of experience of full occupational activity is 1.19 times as large as the ones living in neighborhoods with low num- ber and variety of destinations. For a one category increase in land use mix, the odds of experience of full occupational activity increase by a fac- tor of 2.00. Therefore, for people with disabilities living in neighborhoods with high land use mix, the odds of ex- perience of full occupational activity is 2.00 times as large as the ones living in neighborhoods with low land use mix. Impact of built environment predictors on communal and social activities Table 7 shows the coefficients (labeled Estimate), the Wald Chi-Square statistic, and associated P-values. The chi-square test statistics and associated P-values indicate that the coefficients for income level and population density are statistically significant at 95% confidence level, while the odd ratios of number of destinations and land use mix are not statistically significant. The result of the impact of built environment predictors on communal and social activities indicates a positive association with income level and number of destinations, and a negative association with population density and land use mix as the following: For a one category increase in in- come level, the odds of experience of full communal and social activities in- crease by a factor of 2.443. Therefore, for people with disabilities getting the high- est income level, the odds of experience of full communal and social activities is 2.443 times as large as the ones getting the lowest income level. For a one category increase in pop- ulation density the odds of experience of full communal and social activities decrease by a factor of 0.73 Therefore, for people with disabilities living in high density neighborhoods, the odds of ex- perience of full communal and social activities is 0.73 times less than the ones living in low density neighborhoods. For a one category increase in num- ber and variety of destinations, the odds of experience of full communal and so- cial activities increase by a factor of 3.14. Therefore, for people with disabilities living in neighborhoods with high num- ber and variety of destinations, the odds of experience of full communal and so- cial activities is 3.14 times as large as the ones living in neighborhoods with low number and variety of destinations. For a one category increase in land use mix, the odds of experience of full communal and social activities in- crease by a factor of 1.44. Therefore, for people with disabilities living in neigh- borhoods with high land use mix, the odds of experience of full communal and social activities is 1.44 times as large as the ones living in neighborhoods with low land use mix. Discussion, conclusion and recommendations Income level and social inclusion The findings of this study indicate that income level of neighborhoods has the greatest impact on social inclusion. It is significantly associated with the odds of social inclusion indicators at 95% confidence level. The results of the impact of income level on social inclusion indicate a positive association with all indicators of social inclusion. For a one category increase in income level, the odds of being physically independent increase by a factor of 1.33. Moreover, the increase factor applies to occupation (4.12) and communal and social activities (2.44). People with physical disabilities who live in neighborhoods with high economic status such as Khalda and Dabouq are more likely to be included in society than who live in neighbor- hoods with low economic status such as Al-Manara and Jabal Al-Nadeef. The positive relationship between income level and inclusion is consistent with all literature reporting the relationship be- tween poverty and disability inclusion. Disability in Amman is both a cause and consequence of poverty. People with disabilities and their families are much more likely to experience financial hard- ships than people without disabilities at the same income level. Disability can lead to job loss, limited access to educa- tion and training, reduced earnings, and additional expenses on health care. This can make people with disabilities ex- cluded from economic and social life in many ways leading to poverty. Disabili- ty is also a consequence of poverty be- cause poverty can limit access to health and preventive services and increase the likelihood that a person lives and works in an environment that may negatively affect health. In addition to this, they cannot afford to buy modern support- ive devices that help them in commut- ing such as electric wheelchairs. Neighborhoods with a low-income level in Amman are associated with oth- er predictors such as residential instabil- ity and poor street conditions (Ababseh, 2013). This give an initial conclusion that people with disabilities who live in neighborhoods with high residential in- stability and poor infrastructure are less likely to be included in the society. Mixed land use and social inclusion Mixed land use represents the diversity of land uses in the neighborhood such as residential, commercial, recreational, mixed-use and public services. The results of the study indicate that land use mix is significantly associated with the odds of occupation (P=0.025), while it is not significantly associated with physical independence and participation in communal and social activities. Land use mix has a positive impact on occupation and participation in communal and social activities. People with disabilities live in neighborhoods with a high percentage of land use mix such as Shmisani and Jabal Al-Weibdeh are more likely to participate in com- munal and social activities and have more working and education opportu- nities than people who live in neighbor- hoods with a low percentage of land use mix such as Al-Bnayyat and Al-Msher- feh. People with disabilities prefer living in neighborhoods that provide work and education opportunities within the neighborhood boundary, so they do not have to travel long daily distances. The availability of land use mix is not significantly associated with phys- ical independence and participation in communal and social activities. This is because of people's negative attitudes towards persons with disabilities or the lack of infrastructure and limited acces- sibility in these uses. Number and variety of destinations and social inclusion Number and variety of destinations of neighborhoods is significantly associated with occupation (P = 0.025), while it is not significantly associated with physical independence and participation in communal and social activities. People with physical disability may be more likely to limit their participa- tion in communal and social activities if they live in a neighborhood with no nearby access to shops and public services, than if they live in a neigh- borhood with many nearby shops and easy access to different destinations. Although variety and number of des- tinations have a positive impact on so- cial inclusion, the interviews showed that many people with disabilities face other barriers that impede their partic- ipation such as attitudinal barriers, and poor financial conditions. Variety of destinations has insignifi- cant impact on physical independence because most of these destinations are inaccessible, hindering the indepen- dence of movement among people with physical disabilities. GAM is not responsible for the construction of sidewalks of private buildings wheth- er they are residential or commercial (K. Qeqe, personal communication, 2017). Therefore, there is no connec- tivity along sidewalks, which make the movement of people with disabilities almost impossible without getting oth- er's assistance. Population density and social inclusion Population density has a negative impact on all social inclusion indicators. The associations between residential density and social inclusion observed in this analysis deviate from prior research suggesting that more density in the local community increases physical and social participation. Neighborhoods with high population density (over 22,000 ppl/km²) such as Jabal Al-Akhdar and Jabal Al-Nadeef have low economic status, poor infrastructure, lack of public services, and limited varieties of destination (Ababseh, 2013) which in return negatively affect the inclusion of people with disabilities unlike previous studies in other cities around the world. Lack of accessibility in Amman explain why the study results do not correspond to all previous studies as hypothesized. When asking people with disabilities if they prefer living in neighborhoods with high densities, high mixed-use area, and high num- ber and variety of destinations, most of them prefer the accessible neighbor- hood with a high number of destina- tions and high mixed-use area. Accord- ing to them, if the built environment is accessible without any barriers, they can move independently, be easily en- gaged in communal and social life ac- tivities, and would get better work and education opportunities. Participants remark that local gov- ernment and institutions concerned with people with disabilities affairs should find realistic solutions to re- duce inclusion limitations, and insure full accessibility for them in order to be fully socially included in the society. As a result, urban environment, infra- structure and facilities can impede or enable inclusion of people with disabil- ities in the society. Conclusion The results of this research indicate that income level has a significant impact on all indicators of social inclusion. People live in neighborhoods with high economic status are more likely to be included than who live in neighborhoods with low economic status. They can get a better education and thus better job opportunities; also, they can afford to buy vehicles and assistive modern devices that help them in movement and participation in social and communal activities. Unlike previous studies, the results indicate that population density has a negative association with all indicators of social inclusion. It has been noted that neighborhoods with high population density have low economic status, poor infrastructure, lack of public services, and limited varieties of destination, which in return negatively affect the inclusion of people with disabilities. The results also indicate that mixed use and number and variety of desti- nations have a significant impact on occupation but insignificant impact on physical independence and participa- tion in communal and social activities. Neighborhoods with high mixed-use facilities offer more jobs and education opportunities than neighborhoods with low land mixed. Land use and destinations have insignificant impact on physical independence and partic- ipation in activities because most of the are inaccessible. Analysis of the status of people with disabilities in housing, education, ed- ucation, and work sectors show that accessibility of the built environment has a significant impact on social in- clusion. Lack of accessibility is one of the main reasons of social exclusion, which restricts the movement of peo- ple in access to places of education, employment and participation in var- ious activities. Coordination and co- operation between all governmental agencies should be better applied to ensure environmental facilitation and inclusion in all sectors. Community awareness towards the issue of disabil- ity should also be achieved to reduce attitudinal barriers. The findings of this research can be used as a basic material in the de- velopment of disability policies and social services, which lead to the full social inclusion for people with dis- abilities in Jordan. References Ababsa, M. (2013). Atlas of Jordan: History, Territories and Society. Bey- routh: Presses de l'Ifpo. Albright, J. (2015). What is the Dif- ference Between Logit and Probit Mod- els? Tutorial Methods. Retrieved from https://www.methodsconsultants.com/ tutorial/what-is-the-difference-be- tween-logit-and-probit-models/ Al-Hares, G. (2018, November). In- clusion of people with disabilities [Per- sonal interview]. Al Ju'beh, K. (2015). Disability-in- clusive development toolkit. Bensheim: CBM. Azzeh, M. (2018, July). Disability situation in Jordan [Interview]. In Ra- dio Fan FM. Amman. Azzeh, L. (2017). New law on dis- ability opens 'new era' for country. The Jordan Times. Retrieved from http:// jordantimes.com/news/local/new-law- disability-opens-new-era'-country-—- official Crabtree, J. & Gerry, L. (2013). Cog- nitive behavioral therapy and the im- pact of internalized societal discourses in people with intellectual disabilities: a case example. Advances in Mental Health and Intellectual Disabilities, 7(1),59-65. Creswell, J. W. (2014). Education- al research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research. Boston: Pearson. Department of Statistics (DOS) (2015). Report of the General Popula- tion and Population Census (2015). Jor- dan. Dupire, C., (2018). Jordan's law on rights of people with disability recog- nized at global summit. The Jordan Times. Retrieved from http://www. jordantimes.com/news/local/jor- dans-law-rights-people-disability-rec- ognised-global-summit HCD.(2018) Jordanian law article No. 20 for the year 2017. Higher Coun- cils of the Rights of persons with Dis- abilities. Retrieved from http://hcd. gov.jo/en/content/law-rights-persons- disabilities-no-20-year-2017 Henn, M. , Weinstein, M., & Foard, N. (2009). A Critical Introduction to Social Research. London: Sage Publica- tions. Labonté, R., Hadi, A. & Kauff- mann, X. (2011). Indicators of Social Exclusion and Inclusion: A Critical and Comparative Analysis of the Literature: Institute of Population Health Uni- versity of Ottawa. Research Gate. Re- trieved from https://www.researchgate. net/publication/235443128_Indica- tors_of_Social_Exclusion_and_Inclu- sion_A_Critical_and_Comparative_ Analysis_of_the_Literature Leslie, R., Leslie, K. & Murphy, M. (2003). Inclusion by design: The chal- lenge for social work in workplace accommodation for people with dis- abilities. Emerging Perspectives on An- ti-oppression Practice, 157–169. Toron- to: Canadian Scholar's Press. Lombe, M. & Sherraden, M. (2007). Effects of participating in an asset-build- ing intervention on social inclusion (CSD Working Paper No. 07-02). St. Louis, MO: Washington University, Center for Social Development. Jaber, M. (2012). Pity Feeling for people with disabilities preventing them and integrating them into society. Algh- ad Newspaper. Retrieved from https:// alghad.com/تارظن-ةقفشلا-يوذل- ةقاعإلا-لوحت-نود-جمد/ Otoum, I., Aljbra, R., Momani, H. & Hammad, C. (2017). The reality of dis- ability (job difficulties) in Jordan based on data from the 2015 Population and Housing Census. Amman: Department of Statistics. Thomas, C. (2004) Rescuing a social relational understanding of disability. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Re- search. 6(1), 22-36. Thomas, P. E., Srihari, M., & Kaur, S. (2015). Handbook of research on cultur- al and economic impacts of the informa- tion society. Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. Turmusani, M. 1999. "Disability Pol- icy and Provision in Jordan: A Critical Perspective." Disability and Develop- ment: Learning from Action and Re- search on Disability in The Majority World, Chp. (12), 193–209. Leeds: The Disability Press. UN. (2007). Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), preamble. United Nations -Depart- ment of Economic and Social Affairs Disability . Retrieved from https:// www.un.org/development/desa/dis- abilities/convention-on-the-rights-of- persons-with-disabilities.html UN. (2018). Disability, Accessibility and Sustainable Urban Development Enable. United Nations -Department of Economic and Social Affairs Dis- ability. Retrieved from https://www. un.org/development/desa/disabili- ties/resources/disability-accessibili- ty-and-sustainable-urban-develop- ment.html UN. (2013). Accessibility and Devel- opment – Mainstreaming disability in the post-2015 development agenda. Re- trieved from United Nations -Depart- ment of Economic and Social Affairs Disability . Retrieved from https:// www.un. org/ development/desa/ dspd/2013/12/accessibility-and-de- velopment- mainstreaming- dis- ability-in-the-post-2015-develop- ment-agenda/ WHO (1980), International Classifi- cation of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps. Washington D.C.: World Health Organization. WHO, & The World Bank. (2011). World Report on Disability (Rep.). WHO. Retrieved from https://www. who.int/.