D. Demmler, D. Krupka, H. Federrath. (Hrsg.): INFORMATIK 2022, Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Society for Computer Science, Bonn 2022 703
The Universal Paradox

In the field of tension between universal design and user experience in an indoor navigation app for people with disabilities

Andy Börner1, Verena Traubinger2, Philipp Stiens1 und Maximilian Eibl1

Translated from "Das Universal Paradox", doi: 10.18420/inf2022_56, via Google Translate, June 29, 2023

Abstract: Accessibility and inclusion are often high hurdles in web applications. In technology development, the universal design serves as a framework for a product for all users. In reality, however, individual solutions are often developed. Based on the development of an indoor navigation app, three areas of tension in the development of technology are shown: awareness vs. accessibility, level of detail vs. excessive demands and individualization vs. data security. This shows where there are challenges for a good user experience between individual needs and universal usability.
Keywords: Universal Design; User Experience; Barrierefreiheit; Indoor Navigation; User-Centered


Introduction
Rules such as WCAG 2.1 [WC22] can be used to implement accessibility in web applications. In technology development, Universal Design (UD) is used as a framework for implementing these requirements [St01]. While accessibility recognizes and removes possible barriers, the goal of the UD is to have no or as few barriers as possible [Go09]. The opposite of this holistic approach are isolated solutions that are adapted to specific needs. Navigation apps that have special requirements in terms of functionality and user interface should serve as an example here. Many smartphone users are familiar with Google Maps as a navigation application [GM22]. However, some applications cover the specific needs of users with physical and mental disabilities: Wheelmap [WM22] shows the accessibility of publicly accessible buildings. People with visual impairments can use high-contrast map views [SD22] or indoor navigation apps for individual buildings [LS22]. The universal design is based on seven principles [St01]. In this paper, paradoxes of contradicting UD guidelines in relation to accessibility are to be shown as an example using an indoor navigation app with a focus on the integration of people with visual and walking impairments [Ri20]. In the following, three areas are presented in which the consideration of accessibility and the

1 TU Chemnitz, Professur Medieninformatik, Straße der Nationen 62, 09111 Chemnitz, vorname.nachname@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de,
2 TU Chemnitz, Professur Verteilte Systeme und selbstorganisierende Rechnersysteme, Straße der Nationen 62, 09111 Chemnitz, verena.traubinger@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de




cba doi:10.18420/inf2022_56
Principles of UD influenced the design of the app. These paradoxical dilemmas were resolved using the "when in doubt, limit" approach.


Awareness vs. Accessibility
Most user interactions take place in the app via the map display, which is also the main interface. The UD demands in principle 4c the maximum readability of information and in 1d that the design is appealing to everyone [St01]. In the context of the app, this primarily affects the map display, which contains information that can be read by everyone and should be designed in an appealing way.

At least 2.2 billion people worldwide have some form of visual impairment [WH21]. In order to create a UD, it is therefore important to design the map in such a way that as few people as necessary have to change the settings to use it. In the context of the project, this particularly includes people with color vision defects (red-green, blue- yellow) and people with visual impairments who can only clearly perceive very strong contrasts.
Color Universal Design (CUD) colors are used to enable people with and without visual impairments to have a positive user experience [OI02]. The CUD recommends eight colors that are clearly distinguishable even for people with color vision impairment. Seven key map areas have been identified that have an impact on navigation and orientation for people with disabilities.

Abb. 1: v. l. n. r. CUD in the simulator of color vision deficiency, CUD, OSM colors in the simulator, OSM colors - Although there are no more colors, with CUD it is possible to distinguish the individual elements compared to OSM.

One of the eight colors was assigned to each of the seven areas. Information about the respective map area is conveyed via the selected colors. Possible danger areas, e.g. due to movable furniture, are marked in red (Vermillion). Sanitary rooms blue based on the water available there, windows in sky blue. In addition, some areas such as toilets are marked with a symbol on the map, otherwise the information would only be transmitted via the color. Despite using familiar colors, the color scheme created differs significantly from schemes of the most common map services [GM22] [OS22], see Figure 1. For users who are used to these map services, it can lead to confusion if no legends or a tutorial be available.
In order to enable all users to have a user experience according to their needs in the sense of the UD (principle 2), it is possible to change the design of the card via a settings menu. The choice for the map view is between the CUD color scheme and the OSM standard scheme.


Level of Detail vs. Excessive Demands
The mapping serves as the data basis for rendering, routing and subsequent navigation instructions. The basis for the design with regard to the 3rd principle of the UD "simple and intuitive operation" is also laid [St01]. The mapping includes the information levels of the building elements, the furniture and the meta information (room numbers, opening hours, ...). From this, so-called distinctive points can be created, which identify important locations in navigation, such as entrances or exits, toilets or vending machines for usage purposes. People with disabilities often prefer additional multimodal information about the environment: Radiators and windows can provide orientation points in the room through changes in temperature and brightness [Ts16], while large rooms or the explicit naming of missing aids pose challenges [En20].
In addition to information such as materials and colors, the manual or automatic opening of doors is mapped in the example. With the exception of utility objects (garbage cans, 
 sockets, etc.), the decision was made not to map chairs and other small furniture in order to provide a clearer representation (see Figure 1). In addition, areas are marked with 
The mapping follows the OpenStreetMap scheme, which works with tags [OW22]. This makes it possible to mark missing tools and to indicate this later in the routing information. The settings can be used to determine how detailed this information is to be output in the routing, for example by only displaying the navigation or information such as a garbage can on the route. In an online study, the relevance of various navigation information for people with and without
Limitations tested [Tr21]. This shows that dividing the users into groups does not 

If more detailed information is to be output, it must be ensured that there is no cognitive overload during navigation [Ts16]. Guideline 3b of the UD "Arrange information according to its importance" [St01] is particularly challenging. Since the relevance of the individual navigation information is very individual, no general order can be established. In studies, the need to plan barrier-free access or the general building structure before starting the journey was mentioned above all by people with disabilities [En20] [Fr21]. This appears when the indoor navigation app is started. The routing can be output easily and flexibly due to the comprehensive mapping and multi-level selection in the app settings.


Individualization vs. Data Security
In order to adapt the app to the needs of users right from the start, the so-called initial dialog must be run through when the app is first started. In this, the users are asked a few questions in order to obtain information for the presentation of the user interface and the individual navigation information. Principle 1b of the UD indicates that segregation and stigmatization of users should be avoided [St01]. In order to fulfill this, users do not record specific limitations, but possible resulting preferences are considered. Any form of survey with the aim of adapting the app to the users inevitably means that data about them has to be stored. This data is fundamentally at risk because it represents a target for attackers [Ha18]. From a data protection point of view, it is therefore desirable to save as little data as possible.

When starting the app for the first time, users are given the opportunity to individualize their preferences with regard to potential limitations in navigation and use: whether they prefer elevators or stairs, wide doors are preferred or how detailed information should be displayed. With these questions, helpful information for navigation can be included without invading the privacy of the users too much or dividing the users into fixed groups (restricted access, restricted vision). For the routing through the building, it is completely irrelevant for what reasons the users decide that they e.g. prefer elevators. This can also be related to the use of a stroller or simply preferring elevators to stairs. In order to keep the initial dialog as short as possible, some data is recorded directly from the smartphone, such as dark themes or voice output.
Nevertheless, the data is stored for the purpose of a better user experience and is therefore fundamentally vulnerable. Attackers can also draw conclusions about the physical abilities of the users from the vague information.
In addition, the question arises as to whether the users trust us to only use the data for the purposes of the app [WL17]. The Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure (GPII) [VTC13] offers an alternative. The aim of the GPII is to securely save personal settings regarding accessibility on the Internet and call them up on any device. This decentralized approach promises advantages in use, since the settings are transferred to the app and thus the initial dialog, for example, could be omitted. At the same time, the transmission harbors risks that do not arise with local storage.
In order to optimally adapt the user experience to individual people and to fulfill principle 2 of the UD [St01], there is an additional settings menu with options for adapting the general display, the adoption of the smartphone settings and the answers to the questions of the initial dialog. Due to the large number of setting options, there is a risk that users will be overwhelmed and, in the worst case, will overlook or ignore settings that are important to them.


Universal Design with Limitations
The principles of the UD are based on 7 principles [St01], which, however, are more oriented towards physical designs and cannot be applied directly to software developments. At the same time, these principles are deliberately vague and formulated in general terms. As can be seen from the three examples above, more complex requirements can lead to a restriction of the user experience and thus contradict the principle of simple and intuitive operation [St01]. In addition to an application for the largest possible base of users, the UD is defined even more broadly according to [IS03]: "Universal design denotes a process more than a definite result." The aim of this paper is to show how a UD can be implemented holistically for an indoor navigation app. Although the decisions have yet to be tested, some possible problem areas were found by applying the UD, which are further considered in tests. If, in the examples presented here, a decision had to be made between the needs of people without disabilities and people with visual or walking impairments, the latter were preferred. On the one hand, it should be avoided that people with disabilities due to aesthetic or functional habits are exposed to further barriers. On the other hand, greater accessibility offers more advantages for all users. For these added values, when considering the design, one can say: When in doubt, for the limitations!


Acknowledgement
This submission was funded by the European Social Fund (ESF) with project number 100382183.
Bibliography
[En20] Engel, C. et.al.: Travelling more independently: A Requirements Analysis for Accessible Journeys to Unknown Buildings for People with Visual Impairments, The 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS '20), Greece, S. 1-11, 2020.
[Fr21] Franzkowiak, L. et.al.: A blind spot in indoor navigation - needs and requirements of visually impaired people, 12th Media Psychology Conference (MediaPsych 2021), Aachen, 2021.
[Go09] Gossett, A.; et.al.: Beyond access: A case study on the intersection between accessibility, sustainability, and universal design. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology 4/09, S. 439-450, 2009.
[GM22] GM, Google Maps, https://www.google.de/maps, Stand: 12.05.2022.
[Ha18] Hamidi, F. et.al.: Who Should Have Access to my Pointing Data?: Privacy Tradeoffs of Adaptive Assistive Technologies. ASSETS '18: Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, Galway Ireland, S. 203-216, 2018.
[IS03] Iwarsson, S.; Ståhl, A.: Accessibility, usability and universal design—positioning and definition of concepts describing person-environment relationships. Disability and Rehabilitation 25/09, S. 57-66, 2003. [LS22] LS, Loud Steps Indoor navigation for the visually impaired, http://loudsteps.com/, Stand: 12.05.2022.
[OI02] Okabe, M.; Ito, K.: Color Universal Design (CUD)- How to make figures and presentations that are friendly to Colorblind people -, https://jfly.uni-koeln.de/color/, Stand: 11.05.2022.
[OS22] OS, OpenStreetMap, https://www.openstreetmap.org, Stand: 08.07.2022.
[OW22] OW, OpenStreetMap Wiki, https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tags, Stand: 06.07.2022.
[Ri20] Richter, J. et.al.: Dynamic indoor navigation and orientation system for people with impairments. In (Alt, F.; Schneegass, S.; Hornecker, E. Hrsg.): Mensch Computer 2020, New York, 473-477, 2020.
[SD22] SD, Stamen Design Stamen Toner Map, http://maps.stamen.com/toner/#12/37.7706/- 122.3782, Stand: 12.05.2022.
[St01] Story, M.F.: Principles of universal design. Universal design handbook, Second Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[Tr21] Traubinger, V. et.al.: The Right Data at the Right Moment for the Right Person — User Requirements and Their Implications for the Design of Indoor Navigation Systems. 2021 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Lloret de Mar Spain, S. 1-8, 2021.
[Ts16] Tscharn, R. et.al.: Turn Left After the Heater': Landmark Navigation for Visually Impaired Users. Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, Reno Nevada USA, S. 295-296, 2016.

[VTC13] Vanderheiden, G.; Treviranus, J.; Chourasia, A.O.: Creating a Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure, 15th Media International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (Association for Computing Machinery), Bellevue Washington, 2013.
[WC22] WC, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1, https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/, Stand: 06.07.2022.
[WH21] WHO, World Health Organization Blindness and vision impairment, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment, Stand: 11.05.2022.
[WL17] Wang, E.; Lin, R.: Perceived quality factors of location-based apps on trust, perceived privacy risk, and continuous usage intention. Behaviour & Information Technology, 01/17, S. 2-10, 2017.
[WM22] WM, Wheelmap, https://wheelmap.org/, Stand: 12.05.2022.