Exploring Preferences towards Integrating the Autonomous Vehicles with the Current Microtransit Services: A Disability Focus Group Study
Ronik Ketankumar Patel1; Roya Etminani-Ghasrodashti, Ph.D.2; Sharareh Kermanshachi, Ph.D., P.E., M.ASCE3; Jay Michael Rosenberger, Ph.D.4;
and David Weinreich, Ph.D.5

1Dept. of Civil Engineering, Univ. of Texas at Arlington (UTA), Arlington, TX. Email: ronikketankumar.patel@mavs.uta.edu
2Center for Transportation Equity, Decisions and Dollars (CTEDD), Univ. of Texas at Arlington (UTA), Arlington, TX. Email: roya.etminani@uta.edu
3Dept. of Civil Engineering, Univ. of Texas at Arlington (UTA), Arlington, TX. Email: sharareh.kermanshachi@uta.edu
4Dept. of Industrial Engineering, Univ. of Texas at Arlington (UTA), Arlington, TX. Email: jrosenbe@uta.edu
5Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, Haifa, Israel. Email: david.weinre@technion.ac.il

ABSTRACT
This study explores how people with disabilities perceive and accept autonomous vehicles (AVs) as a technology to improve their mobility. A focus group discussion was conducted to explore individuals' preferences towards integrating level 4 AVs into the existing microtransit service in Arlington, Texas. Participants demonstrated a positive perception towards the integration of AVs into the current microtransit infrastructure. The results suggest that accessibility to a well-designed built environment is vital in adopting AVs by people with disabilities. Moreover, AVs' accessibility to healthcare facilities is one of the main concerns identified by focus groups of persons with disabilities. In particular, participants with visual impairment were hopeful that future AV services could improve their mobility through advanced apps, booking systems, and vehicle equipment. This study offers several implications for designing AV service in line with the needs of persons with disabilities while combining with the current microtransit service.

INTRODUCTION
According to the Social Security Supplement Survey of Income and Program Participation,
85.3 million people in the United States recorded a disability in 2014 (Taylor, 2018). The National Household Travel Survey (2017) indicates that 25.5 million people; 5 to 64 years of age in the United States; have a disability that impairs their ability to travel(Sprung & Chambers, 2016). Moreover, people older than 65 years of age will be 20 percent of the total population of the United States by 2030 and their demand for riding public transportation services by them will increase rapidly in the coming years (Kaufman et al., 2016).
The emerging autonomous vehicle (AV) technology is expected to disrupt the existing modes of transportation and improve the mobility options (Hwang et al., 2020). Autonomous vehicles that is classified six levels of autonomy ranging from Level 0 "No Automation" to Level 5 "Full Automation"(Shuttleworth, 2019), has the potential of upgrading conventional personal vehicles
and revolutionize transportation. The benefits of this new technology can be optimized while the relationship between the AV system and existing public transit be considered(Shen, Zhang, and Zhao 2018). Integration of the shared autonomous vehicles (SAVs) into the existing on-demand rideshare services could effectively reduce total travel time while the app-based services have the potential to schedule the pick-ups and drop-offs SAVs and collect or distribute the rides (Levin et al. 2019).
A significant number of US cities such as Arlington, TX, Boston, MA, Portland, OR, Pittsburgh, PA, San Jose, CA and Chandler, AZ have already initiated Level 4 AV pilot projects (Perkins et al., 2018). Studies suggest that using level 4 AVs could significantly reduce fatal accidents, traffic congestion, and fuel consumption (Woldeamanuel & Nguyen, 2018).
People with disabilities, particularly those who are visually impaired could benefit the most from AVs due to more comprehensive and convenient transportation options (Bennett et al., 2019). The literature has investigated the general public's attitudes, perceptions, and preferences for autonomous vehicle technology (Kassens-Noor et al., 2020; Hulse et al., 2018; Bezyak et al., 2017). Nonetheless, very little has been written about the perceptions of people with disabilities towards AVs as a public transportation mode.
To address these gaps, this study explores features contribute to the adoption of AVs by people with disabilities while considering their preferences towards integrating a wheelchair accessible AV fleet into the current microtransit service in the city of Arlington, TX. To achieve the objectives of this research we focus on a planned AV service pilot project known as RAPID (Rideshare, Automation, and Payment Integration Demonstration) in the City of Arlington, Texas. The City of Arlington will incorporate autonomous vehicles into its current app-based Via microtransit service under this initiative. Microtransit; introduced in 2012 in the US; is similar to city-operated paratransit or flexible route services using mobile apps and wireless connectivity to enhance the riders' accessibility to its' vans or small buses (Eby et al., 2018). Little is known about the factors influence the AV ridership due to the novelty of its operating system and the technology; less is known about the potential for adoption of emerging AVs by people with disabilities integrated in the service into microtransit transportation. Finding of this study provides insights into establishing and developing the AV service in line with the mobility needs expressed by people with disabilities. The interaction between the perspective AV players such as riders and the operating system plays a crucial role in the success of integration (Shen, Zhang, and Zhao 2018). Accordingly, identifying the transportation needs of the potential AV users can provide opportunities in recognizing how the performance of the overall system after the integration of AV into current transportation services can be improved.

LITERATURE REVIEW
Excessive dependence on personal vehicles for transportation in many US cities has caused mobility challenges for people with disabilities, making them dependent on others unless their city has an accessible public transportation system (Hwang et al., 2020). Previous studies indicate that lack of transportation is a significant barrier for people with disabilities when searching for employment (Sabella & Bezyak, 2019). People with disability are less likely to access healthcare facilities due to inadequate access to transportation and well-designed built environment (Jones et al., 2018; Pharr et al., 2019). Although access to public transportation has improved dramatically for people with disabilities since the enaction of the American with Disabilities Act of 1990, some
accessibility barriers persist for people with disabilities while using public transit modes (Bezyak et al., 2017).
Autonomous vehicle technology has the potential of revolutionizing the transportation industry (Anderson et al., 2016). Autonomous vehicles (AVs) could serve those who are unprivileged (e.g., elderly and disabled), making it convenient for them to travel from one point to another with lower travel costs and better navigation (Freemark et al., 2019). The emergence of AV technology will lead to developing a new business model of shared autonomous vehicles, which could provide first and last-mile solutions through low-cost mobility services (Krueger et al., 2016). Due to the higher cost of sensors and complicated technology, most vehicles on the roads include only up to Level 3 autonomy (Van Brummelen et al., 2018).
To understand the rate of adoption and integration of the AV technology into existing modes of transportation, it is vital to understand the potential users' perception towards AV's (Penmetsa et al., 2019). Multiple studies have investigated the general public's perception of autonomous vehicles by focusing on the demographic and psychological factors (Kyriakidis et al., 2015; Portouli et al., 2017; Hudson et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020). According to Kyriakidis et al., (2015), most people from developed countries had significant concerns regarding software hacking and data misuse. People with high incomes are less likely to share an AV ride, while young people are more likely to share AV ride (Wang et al., 2020). Some scholars have studied the general public perception after riding a Level 3 autonomous shuttle and suggested that individuals perceive AVs as a travel option that could complement and not substitute for existing means of transportation (Hilgarter & Granig, 2020). Their results also revealed that older adults were more optimistic about AV's as compared to younger people, while males were more positive towards AV's as compared to females. Although many studies discuss the general public perception and acceptance of AV's, less attention has been given to their impacts on the mobility of people with disabilities (Hwang et al., 2020; Bennett et al., 2019; Bennett et al., 2020; Bansal et al., 2016).
Reviewing the literature indicates that very little is known about the preferences and acceptance of autonomous vehicles for people with disabilities. This study aims to 1) explore the perceptions of people with disabilities towards the adoption of AV's, and 2) identify the factors affecting the successful integration of AV service into the existing microtransit services from the perspective of people with disabilities. Finally, this study provides insights to guide policymakers developing AV policies and regulations for people with disabilities.

METHODOLOGY

Case Study
Arlington, TX is the first city to employ AV technology as public transit for a pilot test, and therefore makes a meaningful case study for academics and practitioners to learn from. Arlington has also been implementing a traditional app-based, on-demand microtransit service (Via) since 2017, meaning that people in the city are familiar with the concept of on-demand transit, and can respond to many of the questions about AV services. This study investigates the potential users' perceptions of a proposed AV fleet in the Arlington, Texas. According to the United States Census Bureau (2019), the City of Arlington, with a land area of approximately 96 sq. miles, had a population of 398,854 in 2019, and people with a disability (less than 65 years old) represented 7.1% of its population in 2018. The mean travel time to work per day for workers with 16 years of age and older in the city of Arlington was estimated at about 27.4 minutes from 2015 to 2019 (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2019). The median household income of Arlington was recorded $52,094 in 2010 (City of Arlington, 2019). Although the city has not been served by fixed-route transit network, a microtransit service called Via provides ridesharing trips for the general public, including wheelchair accessible vehicles as necessary, in a portion of the city's area, including Downtown Arlington, University Campus, the Entertainment District, the Shopping Malls, and a commuter railway station. From its start in December 2017 through November 2020, the Via rideshare service has provided over 450,000 rides in Arlington, with a high of 1,055 rides on a weekday and 615 rides on a weekend. The Via service area has expanded incrementally and covered approximately 40% of the City's area in November 2020 (Ann Foss, personal communication, November 16, 2020).
To identify how people with disabilities adapt to future transportation options, we focus on a planned AV service pilot project known as RAPID (Rideshare, Automation, and Payment Integration Demonstration) in the City of Arlington, Texas. The Arlington RAPID project has been funded from the Federal Transit Administration under the Integrated Mobility Innovation program and conducted through a partnership between the City of Arlington, Via Transportation, Inc., May Mobility, and the University of Texas at Arlington. Under this project, the City of Arlington will integrate autonomous vehicles into its existing app-based Via microtransit service. This project serves as a demonstration project for the use of autonomous vehicles in public transit, integrating separate booking services, and implementing accessibility in AV service technologies.

Sampling and Data Collection
Rider acceptance is a potential limitation to use of a new service, especially a new technology, and understanding potential challenges for riders with specialized needs like those with accessibility limitations is key. Understanding this requires in-depth conversation with riders, and therefore, focus groups were used, rather than surveys, which would not produce a complete understanding of rider decision processes. Focus groups were chosen over interview formats as well, because of their usefulness for situations where all participants have experienced a similar situation (in this case, trying to get around Arlington, TX with a disability). Comments by one participant can trigger others to remember a similar situation they have undergone, providing the research team with a more complete picture. A seven-step approach was adopted for this study, as shown in Fig 1. People with disabilities who resided or worked in the City of Arlington were shortlisted for the focus group discussion, both from a general email to Via riders, and from members of the disability community recommended by city staff, who had worked on advocacy projects in the past. A screening survey was distributed among the shortlisted people to invite the focus group participants, who were chosen based on either their accessibility challenges, and/or their experience using microtransit. The research team scheduled the dates and times for the session and sent a doodle link to the selected participants to confirm their focus group discussion availability. While the authors recognize that an in-person focus group might have advantages in terms of helping participants feel comfortable talking about their experiences, the Covid-19 pandemic did not make face-to-face interactions possible. Due to the on-going Covid-19 pandemic and lockdown restrictions, the research team decided to virtually conduct the focus group discussion on the Microsoft Teams platform with the participants who accepted the focus group's invitation. However, it is noteworthy that only those people with access to the internet could participate in the focus group discussion as it was conducted virtually. The virtual format had certain advantages as well-making it easier for participants with mobility challenges to attend. A
follow-up survey questionnaire was sent to the focus group participants. Focus group attendees were informed and consented to the recording of the session , in order to prepare a detailed transcript. Finally, the collected data were analysed by performing descriptive and conventional content analysis.


Fig. 1 Research methodology
While the sample size was limited, so was the number of persons with disabilities in the City of Arlington. This limitation was mitigated by the fact that this was designed to be a qualitative study, based on in-depth responses of potential riders regarding existing microtransit services in the city, and AV services being proposed at the time of the focus group. The research team conducted the focus group session in August 2020, with the people with disabilities. A total of four participants with disabilities accepted the team's invitation. The focus group session was conducted by two moderators using a semi-structured guide of questions. The questions were designed to allow the participants to discuss their experience and ideas about the current and future transportation reasonably. Apart from the research team, an official member from the City of Arlington also attended the focus group discussion to answer any questions about the city's proposed AV service. At the beginning of the focus group, verbal consent was obtained from all the participants. After the focus group discussion, the research team sent a follow-up survey questionnaire to all the focus group participants to obtain information about their sociodemographic characteristics. The Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the survey at the University of Texas at Arlington, prior to the implementation of the focus group session.

Data Analysis
This study utilized the qualitative content analysis method to analyse the collected data from participants. Qualitative content analysis is defined as the systematic classification process of coding and identifying themes or patterns as a research tool to subjectively interpret the content of text data (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Qualitative content analysis is one of the most used methods used by the urban and transportation scholars, which focuses on the contextual meaning of the text obtained from focus groups, open-ended survey questions, interviews, articles, etc. (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). The content analysis method provides researchers to explore the trends and
patterns that are hidden inside a large unorganized text data and allows them to evaluate the quantities of concerns underlying the textual contents (Das et al. 2017). The methodology of content analysis requires detailed steps, including designing the research questions and hypothesis, identifying the sample, defining the unit of analysis, choosing the enumeration systems, constructing the categories and sub-categories, and checking the validity of categories (Cullinane and Toy 2000). Using conventional content analysis method, the research team reviewed the focus group discussion transcript. After reviewing the transcript, the discussion themes were extracted in terms of preferences towards combining the proposed AV service into the existing microtransit service. Furthermore, different categories and sub-categories of each theme were extracted based on the information provided by the participants during the focus group discussion and the handwritten notes of the discussion.

RESULTS
 Results from follow up survey indicated that participants were white American females, with 
 full-time or part-time employment, three of them had visual impairment and one had a physical 
 disability. The focus group participants provided valuable information to the research team about their travel patterns and behaviors, mobility issues, and attitudes towards using Arlington's transportation services. The research team asked a question in the follow-up survey regarding the level of control of the autonomous vehicle with which participants were most comfortable with. Two participants were pleased with a shared control between the driver and the self-driving car, while the other participants choose not to answer it. The following sections describe the detailed results regarding the participants' main concerns and issues about the proposed RAPID autonomous vehicle service in Arlington.

Preferences of Autonomous Vehicle (AV) Service
The participants stated their preferences towards different attributes of the proposed AV service. Table 1 shows the disability focus group's preferences of the proposed AV service in Arlington.

Accessibility
People with disabilities preferred that the proposed AV services be spatially accessible by 
 different residents living in various neighborhoods. When shown the map of service area, people with disabilities stated that it seems the AV service is inaccessible to the healthcare facilities and hospitals in North Arlington. One participant also expressed that it seemed the proposed AV service had focused too much on the campus area, and not on the areas of the city outside it, where they felt more of the disability community lived.

Safety
The participants showed a great preference towards an onboard safety assistant to help them during an emergency. Boarding an autonomous vehicle would be more convenient for people with disabilities if they perceive there would be someone to aid them. For the convenience and safety of disabled people, one out of the five AVs would be wheelchair accessible and equipped with a
safety attendant in the proposed AV service. However, participants were in agreement that only one wheelchair accessible vehicle cannot support the mobility needs of persons with disabilities. While the facilitator stated that the future AV service will be provide by a safety attendant on all vehicles, one participant said that since it will be very helpful for boarding people with disabilities. Another participant noted that since the population of senior adults and people with disabilities is increasing, there is an urgent need for emerging transportation services to be more disability friendly.

Technology improvements
Since people with disabilities all have unique mobility needs, according to their disability, the facilitator asked them to describe preferences towards AV app booking system's features. A participant with visual impairments stated that designing the booking application with the screen reader's accessibility could help people with visual impairments. However, she believed that they should test the facilities designed to mitigate the mobility needs of disabled people. Another participant suggested integrating Apple Pay, Google Pay, or Samsung Pay into the payment system for future AVs as these methods are more convenient for people with disabilities. One participant expected the AV application could provide riders with the exact pick-up location, which has not been a feature of the Via service to date. Therefore, if the driver cannot locate them, they can share their location with the driver. Participants also suggested some technological preferences about the vehicle and cabin. They stated that since some people have service dogs while boarding the vehicle, having a mat on the floor keeps dogs from sliding. Furthermore, a participant suggested that the AV service application's user profiles should include information regarding their disabilities, allowing them to select their route and stops based on their mobility needs.

Improving the built environment
Participants of the disability group affirmed that one of the most significant desires they have is an improved built environment based on their mobility needs (e.g., equipping the pick-up and 
 drop-off points with shelters and ramps). They suggested that AV operators could take help from professionals with experience in the mobility needs of disabled people to determine what will work for them.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Focus group participants generally showed a positive perception towards the AV service. This finding confirm the previous studies that suggest AV service can be accepted by people with disabilities in order to improve their transportation accessibility (Hwang et al., 2020; Hilgarter & Granig, 2020;Wang et al., 2020). However, results indicate that disabled people are not interested in riding entirely self-driving vehicles. This result follows the research suggesting that disability groups require trained operators to assist those who need help in boarding the vehicle (Hwang et al., 2020). Policymakers should consider this factor while developing and integrating transit systems using AV technology. And while specializations like rider attendants and predictable stop locations may cost additional money, these are some of the costs necessary to make the service work for riders with disabilities—and may still be affordable when compared to the cost of running paratransit services.
Table 1. Disability focus group findings regarding mobility preferences of future AV services

Subject
Theme
Subtheme
Details
AV Preferences
Geographical Accessibility
Health Care Accessibility
- "If AV coverage went a little bit further North, that would be just to even get the hospital over there that would be great actually, I guess."
UTA
Centered
- "You're not just serving AV to students, you're also serving the community as a whole, I think the AV
coverage should be a little more spread out maybe."

Safety
Presence of Human Operator
"There would probably still be some sort of live person onboard the autonomous vehicle just to assist in case of an emergency."
"Five of the vehicles should have the safety attendant and should be trained for boarding."

Technology improvements
App Booking System
"Make a screen reader accessible for blind people and let a blind person test it."
"Integrate Apple Pay or Google Pay or Samsung Pay to the payment system, it's so much easier for those who are disabled in that mobility and dexterity problems."
"Since I can't physically look for the vehicle, if I can say I am at a place of business and the AV supposed to meet me in a parking lot. I would hope that I would be able to say somehow, OK, I'll be standing outside XYZ
business to driver."
Vehicle Equipment
- "What kind of flooring you guys have in the autonomous vehicles, because so many of us have service dogs and having mats in the floor keeps the
dogs from sliding."
User Profile
" People can enter their disability needs in their user ID AV application, and AV adjust the pick-up point based on the disable person's needs."
"Since you cannot communicate with the AV's. So, it would be nice if disable people can put their needs such as the pick-up point to their user ID."
Improving the built environment
Lack of sidewalk, ramp and curb cuts
"We definitely need to pick up in places with good sidewalks, but we also need places with good ramps and shelters as well."
"I would say hire a consultant, who either has a whole lot of disability experience or hire somebody with a disability and be sure that they work with a team of people with disabilities to determine what will work for the most people."
In addition to service costs, it is critical for transit agencies to inform the public about their service offerings through information campaigns considering the fact that many people with disabilities will be skeptical about a service with which they are still unfamiliar (Bennett et al., 2019). In order to promote the use of AVs, local or state governments can provide incentives to the people who opt to use AVs as a mode of transportation, particularly if they opt to use it instead of more costly like paratransit.
Results suggest that access to health care providers is among the most crucial needs for people with disabilities. Similar to previous studies, our participants said that lack of mobility can prevent seniors and people with disabilities from accessing health care facilities in distant areas. Public transit dependent population are more likely to miss appointments or have late arrivals compared to those who use private vehicle as to travel to health care facilities (Wallace et al., 2005; Rask et al., 1994). Accordingly, adding to the existing routes, increasing operating hours, and providing more frequent services are among the policies that public transit service could apply to improve patients' accessibility to treatment and care (Litman, 2013).
Additionally, we note that access to an appropriate built environment was a vital factor either contributing to or impeding people with disabilities' likeliness of using the service. This finding suggests that inaccessible built environments are obstacles to people with disabilities use of current microtransit service. The local and state government should focus on redeveloping the existing infrastructure suitable for the emerging technology before integrating AV's into the current transportation services.
Lastly, we would like to note few limitations to this study-which need to be addressed when doing future research. The major limitation of this study is related to the few number of individuals who participated in the focus group discussion. Since this study was conducted concurrent with the spread of Covid-19, the sample size was limited and small. Accordingly, exploring the preferences of a greater number of participants with different disabilities could increase the validity of the further research in this era. This study focuses on the combination of emerging transportation with current microtransit services; future studies should be conducted to recognize the integrations of AV service into other transportation options including paratransit services. A more diverse range of studies of this type will be made possible as the range of microtransit service models grows, and the number of AV-microtransit systems expands over time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) for the support of the Arlington RAPID (Rideshare, Automation, and Payment Integration Demonstration) project through the Integrated Mobility Innovation grant program. The RAPID project is a collaboration between different partners including the City of Arlington, University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), Via, and May Mobility. In addition, special thanks to Dr. Ann Foss, Principal Planner in the Office of Strategic Initiatives at the city of Arlington, for providing great leadership and guidance in the RAPID project. The authors also acknowledge Erin Murphy who moderated the focus group discussion sessions.

REFERENCES
Anderson, J. M., Kalra, N., Stanley, K. D., Sorensen, P., Samaras, C., and Oluwatola, O. (2016).
Autonomous vehicle technology: a guide for policymakers. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Bansal, P., Kockelman, K. M., and Singh, A. (2016). Assessing public opinions of and interest in new vehicle technologies: An Austin perspective. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 67, 1-14.
Bennett, R., Vijaygopal, R., and Kottasz, R. (2019). Attitudes towards autonomous vehicles among people with physical disabilities. Transportation research part A: policy and practice, 127, 1-17.
Bennett, R., Vijaygopal, R., and Kottasz, R. (2020). Willingness of people who are blind to accept autonomous vehicles: an empirical investigation. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 69, 13-27.
Bezyak, J. L., Sabella, S. A., and Gattis, R. H. (2017). Public Transportation: An Investigation of Barriers for People With Disabilities. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 28(1), 52-60. https://doi.org/10.1177/1044207317702070.
City of Arlington. (2019). Demographic Data. Retrieved 17 November 2020 from https://www.arlingtontx.gov/open_data/city_statistics/demographic_data.
Cullinane, Kevin, and Toy, Neal. 2000. "Identifying Influential Attributes in Freight Route/Mode Choice Decisions: A Content Analysis." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 36 (1): 41–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1366-5545(99)00016-2.
Das, Subasish, Dixon, Karen, Sun, Xiaoduan, Dutta, Anandi, and Zupancich, Michelle. 2017. "Trends in Transportation Research: Exploring Content Analysis in Topics." Transportation Research Record 2614 (1): 27–38. https://doi.org/10.3141/2614-04.
Eby, D. W., Molnar, L. J., and Louis, R. M. S. (2018). Perspectives and Strategies for Promoting Safe Transportation Among Older Adults. Elsevier.
Freemark, Y., Hudson, A., and Zhao, J. (2019). Are Cities Prepared for Autonomous Vehicles?
Journal of the American Planning Association, 85(2), 133-151. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944363.2019.1603760.
Hilgarter, K., and Granig, P. (2020). Public perception of autonomous vehicles: a qualitative study based on interviews after riding an autonomous shuttle. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 72, 226-243.
Hsieh, H.-F., and Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qualitative health research, 15(9), 1277-1288.
Hudson, C. R., Deb, S., Carruth, D. W., McGinley, J., and Frey, D. (2019). Pedestrian Perception of Autonomous Vehicles with External Interacting Features. Advances in Human Factors and Systems Interaction, Cham.
Hulse, L. M., Xie, H., and Galea, E. R. (2018). Perceptions of autonomous vehicles: Relationships with road users, risk, gender and age. Safety Science, 102, 1-13.
Hwang, J., Li, W., Stough, L., Lee, C., and Turnbull, K. (2020). A focus group study on the potential of autonomous vehicles as a viable transportation option: Perspectives from people with disabilities and public transit agencies. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 70, 260-274.
Jones, M., Morris, J., and Deruyter, F. (2018). Mobile Healthcare and People with Disabilities: Current State and Future Needs. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(3), 515.
Kassens-Noor, E., Kotval-Karamchandani, Z., and Cai, M. (2020). Willingness to ride and perceptions of autonomous public transit. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 138, 92-104.
Kaufman, S. M., Smith, A., O'Connell, J., and Marulli, D. (2016). Intelligent paratransit.
Retrieved 04 November 2020 from http://wagner.nyu.edu/rudincenter/wp- content/uploads/2016/09/INTELLIGENT_PARATRANSIT.pdf.
Krueger, R., Rashidi, T. H., and Rose, J. M. (2016). Preferences for shared autonomous vehicles.
Transportation research part C: emerging technologies, 69, 343-355.
Kyriakidis, M., Happee, R., and de Winter, J. C. F. (2015). Public opinion on automated driving: Results of an international questionnaire among 5000 respondents. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 32, 127-140. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2015.04.014.
Levin, Michael W., Odell, Michael, Samarasena, Shaluka, and Schwartz, Adam. 2019. "A Linear Program for Optimal Integration of Shared Autonomous Vehicles with Public Transit." Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 109 (December): 267–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.10.007.
Litman, T. (2013). Transportation and public health. Annual review of public health, 34, 217- 233.
Penmetsa, P., Adanu, E. K., Wood, D., Wang, T., and Jones, S. L. (2019). Perceptions and expectations of autonomous vehicles–A snapshot of vulnerable road user opinion.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 143, 9-13.
Perkins, L., Dupuis, N., and Rainwater, B. (2018). Autonomous Vehicle Pilots Across America.
Center for City Solutions. Washington, DC: National League of Cities (NLC). https://www.nlc. org/resource/autonomous-vehicle-pilots-across-america.
Pharr, J. R., James, T., and Yeung, Y.-L. (2019). Accessibility and accommodations for patients with mobility disabilities in a large healthcare system: How are we doing? Disability and Health Journal, 12(4), 679-684. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2019.03.008.
Portouli, E., Karaseitanidis, G., Lytrivis, P., Amditis, A., Raptis, O., and Karaberi, C. (2017). Public attitudes towards autonomous mini buses operating in real conditions in a Hellenic city. 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV).
Rask, K. J., Williams, M. V., Parker, R. M., and McNagny, S. E. (1994). Obstacles predicting lack of a regular provider and delays in seeking care for patients at an urban public hospital. Jama, 271(24), 1931-1933.
Sabella, S. A. P. C. R. C., and Bezyak, J. L. P. C. R. C. (2019). Barriers to Public Transportation and Employment: A National Survey of Individuals With Disabilities. Journal of Applied Rehabilitation Counseling, 50(3), 174-185. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1891/0047-
2220.50.3.174.
Shen, Yu, Zhang, Hongmou, and Zhao, Jinhua. 2018. "Integrating Shared Autonomous Vehicle in Public Transportation System: A Supply-Side Simulation of the First-Mile Service in Singapore." Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 113 (July): 125–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2018.04.004.
Shuttleworth, J. (2019). SAE Standards News: J3016 automated-driving graphic update. SAE International. Retrieved 04 November 2020 from https://www.sae.org/news/2019/01/sae- updates-j3016-automated-driving-graphic.
Sprung, M. J., and Chambers, M. (2016). Transportation Statistics Annual Report 2016.
Retrieved 04 November 2020 from https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/32787.
Taylor, D. M. (2018). Americans with disabilities: 2014. Retrieved 17 November 2020 from https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2018/demo/p70-152.pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). Quick Facts: Arlington City, Texas. Retrieved 17 November 2020 from https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/arlingtoncitytexas.
Van Brummelen, J., O'Brien, M., Gruyer, D., and Najjaran, H. (2018). Autonomous vehicle perception: The technology of today and tomorrow. Transportation research part C: emerging technologies, 89, 384-406.
Wallace, R., Hughes-Cromwick, P., Mull, H., and Khasnabis, S. (2005). Access to health care and nonemergency medical transportation: two missing links. Transportation research record, 1924(1), 76-84.
Wang, S., Jiang, Z., Noland, R. B., and Mondschein, A. S. (2020). Attitudes towards privately- owned and shared autonomous vehicles. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 72, 297-306.
Woldeamanuel, M., and Nguyen, D. (2018). Perceived benefits and concerns of autonomous
vehicles: An exploratory study of millennials' sentiments of an emerging market. Research in Transportation Economics, 71, 44-53.