Journal of the American Planning Association






ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjpa20

The Right to (Re)Shape the City
Examining the Accessibility of a Public Engagement Tool for People Living With Dementia

Samantha Biglieri

To cite this article: Samantha Biglieri (2021) The Right to (Re)Shape the City, Journal of the American Planning Association, 87:3, 311-325, DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2020.1852100
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/01944363.2020.1852100




View supplementary material 

 Published online: 16 Feb 2021.

 Submit your article to this journal 

 Article views: 1176
 View related articles View Crossmark data

 Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 










Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjpa20


The Right to (Re)Shape the City
Examining the Accessibility of a Public Engagement Tool for People Living With Dementia


eshaping the city through public engagement in the planning process is a citizenship right. However, debates about public participation in planning neglect a fundamental question
about who can access these engagement tools and how to best engage typically excluded groups, particu- larly people with disabilities. In this study I focus on the experiences of people living with dementia (PLWD), as a population who has historically been overlooked, to make public engagement tools more inclusive.
Dementia is a disability and, like other individuals with disabilities (who make up 25% of the population), PLWD want to be included in the communities in which they live and have the right to be enabled to participate in those communities (Shakespeare et al., 2019). Planners can influence part of that inclusion in society in two ways: built environment features and arrangements (e.g., land use, urban design, wayfinding, transportation, etc.) and access to civic life, decision making, and the planning process itself. In this study I focus on the
latter,1 asking what the barriers and facilitators to partici- pation during public engagement tools like open houses for PLWD are.
The World Health Organization (WHO, 2012) calls dementia a major cause of "dependency among older people worldwide" (p. 2). Globally, the number of PLWD is projected to increase from 47 million to 132 million by 2050 (WHO, 2017). Recently, PLWD have been asked to comment on policy related to their own health/social care (Edick et al., 2017; Nedlund & Nordh, 2015; Public Health Agency of Canada, 2018); however, they are not included in the planning process that shapes the com- munities they live in (Lin & Lewis, 2015). This absence of engagement is likely due to hegemonic misconceptions about PLWD that presume incapacity, which perpetu- ates widespread stigma, and seeing PLWD as passive care recipients instead of citizens with voices to be heard (Bartlett & O'Connor, 2010; Mitchell et al., 2013).
To date, even with the growing number of municipally
led age- and dementia-friendly city policies that


DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2020.1852100 " © 2021 American Planning Association, Chicago, IL.
Color version available at tandfonline.com/rjpa



continue to be put forward (Williams-Roberts et al., 2015), these calls for increased engagement of PLWD have not been heeded in planning research.
PLWD deserve to be engaged in discussion about places where they live, and the adaptation of a public engagement tool used during the planning process could challenge the stigma associated with dementia. In the dementia studies literature, there is evidence that
 communication, physical/sensory environments, and 
 visual media should be considered, but research has not been conducted in a public engagement setting related to city building (Dupuis, Gillies et al., 2012).
Although this study explores experiences during a ses- sion of one type of public engagement tool (the open house) to understand how to adapt this tool for PLWD, this project also has broader implications for adaptation of other mechanisms that are part of a planner's toolbox (e.g., design charrettes, town halls, etc.). Accessibility within these public engagement tools for PLWD is one way for planners to support them in actualizing their innate citizenship rights regardless of their disability.
Further, this implication for planning education goes beyond PLWD to people with disabilities in general. McCormick et al. (2019) find a significant gap in linking planning and disability: Since 2000, the two main plan- ning journals (Journal of the American Planning Association and the Journal of Planning Education and Research) have each published one article related to dis- ability. The current project is an example of how expli- citly planning with the disabled community is both required and attainable. It is also necessary to support movements of people with disabilities globally and in the ongoing fight for accommodation and supports that enable the equitable integration of people with dis- abilities into community and civic life (e.g., through deinstitutionalization, legislative requirements for accommodation, and civil rights [self-advocacy, voting, informing public officials of their needs]; Goodley, 2011; McCormick et al., 2019). Further, this places the problem of disability within the way society is organized, with the need to be addressed by multiscalar "socio-political interventions," not as the fault of the individual (Goodley, 2011, p. 3).
To conduct this work, I attended municipal- and nonprofit-led open houses (meant for attendance by the general public to garner feedback on a variety of planning related topics with PLWD) individually or in small groups and used several data generation techni- ques. This led to a number of recommendations for public engagement tools, specifically the need for staff's approach to be respectful and patient (communication); the need to create a legible, familiar, and comfortable 
 environment (physical/sensory environment); and the need to produce clear, distinct information visually through diverse presentation mediums (presentation of
information). Unexpected findings include how partici- pants felt like their voice mattered, suggesting a sense of inclusion, and citizenship, underscoring the import- ance of investigating accessibility of public engage- ment tools.

Background
Dementia is an umbrella term describing progressive symptoms affecting memory, cognitive abilities, and behavior that can affect spatial navigation, judgment, and visual perception (WHO, 2017).2 Dementia can affect individuals at different rates; those in the earlier stages are more likely to have less severe symptoms. Two-thirds of PLWD live in their own homes in the com- munity (Alzheimer Society of Canada, 2010), and they are likely to experience a "shrinking world" effect, mak- ing it essential for planners to investigate the relation- ship between PLWD and the accessibility of the built environment (Duggan et al., 2008; Shoval et al., 2011).
The research focusing on planning outcomes began with a seminal study resulting in six principles for design (familiarity, legibility, distinctiveness, accessibility, com- 
 fort, and safety) and 17 land use/urban design recom- mendations that can be grouped into three thematic categories (Figure 1; Biglieri, 2017; Burton &
Mitchell, 2006).
With fewer than 20 studies worldwide, work is con- centrated in the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Canada, 
 examining PLWD traveling to grocery stores (systematic 
 observation), crossing the street (video analysis), and 
 understanding sociospatial lived places (walking inter- 
 views, social network mapping, home tours; Biglieri, 2017; Brorsson et al., 2013, 2016; Ward et al., 2018). This research shows that PLWD have unique experiences in diverse built environments that are different from those of older adults in terms of wayfinding, being over- whelmed by noise and activity, impaired depth percep- tion, and issues with judgment. As planners, we need to properly investigate these experiences, which will ultim- ately lead to better practices for urban design and land use policy. However, better planning outcomes are only one part of building a just city. Just outcomes will not suffice alone; we must concurrently consider justice in access to the planning process itself (Fainstein, 2010; Yiftachel, 1998). For PLWD, the evidence of unique experiences in the built environment indicates their experiences during the planning process might also
be different.

Accessing the Planning Process as a Citizenship Right
The right to the city, and to (re)shape the place one lives in, is a well-established concept in planning





Figure 1. Burton and Mitchell's (2006) recommendations (thematically grouped by Biglieri).

(Fainstein, 2010; Lefebvre, 1996). One of the ways peo- ple shape their cities is through engagement in the planning process (Corburn, 2009). Ensuring this is inclu- sive of all people is central to professional planning codes of practice/ethics (AICP, 2016; Ontario Professional Planners Institute [OPPI], 2019).3 Arnstein's (1969) ladder of participation describes various levels of intent behind the planning process and has been debated since its introduction, including in collaborative versus communicative planning, how to create redis- tributive process, and even questioning the validity of including the public in any discussions on urban policy- making (Lord et al., 2017; Slotterback & Lauria, 2019).
These macroscale debates, though integral to public engagement, neglect a fundamental question: Are the tools used in the planning process accessible to all peo- ple? Examining the accessibility of these tools is a response to recent calls to acknowledge the vital role of compassion, emotional intelligence, and relationality in planning practice (Lyles & Swearingen White, 2019) by attending to the real-life experiences of PLWD.
Engagement in the planning process is one example of involvement in participatory democracy and one way to express citizenship. A key feature of citizen- ship in a democracy is guaranteeing "vote and voice"
through three principles: congruence (match between being affected by policy and having the right to com- ment on it); responsiveness (ability of a government to respond to citizen comments); and representation (pro- viding opportunity to express opinions [in]directly; Sonnicksen, 2016). However, for PLWD, there is the mis- conception that they should not be able to vote or access government processes due to a perceived lack of cognitive capacity and because they are not citizen enough (Bartlett & O'Connor, 2010). This stigmatization is reflected in the persistent language used to describe PLWD as sufferers "doomed, gutted, ravaged, taken over
by a beast, and … the living dead," perpetuating the tra- gedy discourse (Mitchell et al., 2013, p. 2; Swaffer, 2014). It also stems from perceptions that PLWD are not in control and often manifests as intentional exclusion from social/cultural/political spheres (Dear et al., 1997; Mitchell et al., 2013; Swaffer, 2014). However, enabling PLWD to express citizenship, such as through engage- ment in the planning process, could challenge these misconceptions. This goes beyond thinking of PLWD through a biomedical lens (sufferers of a deadly disease) and a personhood lens (with the ability to provide insight into their lives) to social citizenship, which sees them as active social agents and members of society



(Bartlett & O'Connor, 2010).4 This push toward social citi- zenship is closely related to the "dementia is a disability" activist movement. As an activist living with
dementia, Swaffer (2014) states, "We want to access services and to participate in the community the way everyone has a right to expect, and to have our disabil- ities respected with acceptance, support and enable- ment" (p. 714).
Laws asserting the rights of PLWD to be presumed capable in terms of their own decision making in health/social care, making a will, etc., unless proven otherwise, are becoming more popular globally. These kinds of laws do not mean immediate inclusion or being enabled to participate "in the communities, towns and cities in which they live" (Bartlett & O'Connor, 2010, p. 45). This is because the communities in which we live are not built to support PLWD. Recently, Jim Mann (2020), an advocate living with dementia, stated that Canada needs a charter of rights for PLWD because of the prevalence of assuming vul- nerability and incapacity in health care settings, busi- nesses, and out in the community more frequently than not renders "our rights subsumed" (p. 63).
The current discourse of dementia-friendly city poli-
cies within municipalities conceptualizes PLWD as a vul- nerable group to be cared for rather than as citizens of the places they live in. This calls for a seemingly small but significant reorientation from a more paternalistic approach (similar to the personhood approach described earlier) to one that centers on the belief that PLWD are "equal contributors [to society]" (a "dementia-positive" approach; Lin & Lewis, 2015, p. 242). Thus, research into the accessibility of the planning process for PLWD must start with the belief that PLWD have meaningful sugges- tions to contribute to the conversation of city building, confronting stigma (Mitchell et al., 2013). This research aligns with others who assert that the meaningful inclu- sion of perspectives from marginalized groups will lead to more just cities and are for moving from planning for to planning with communities (Fainstein, 2010). As planners, we need to think about how we create our planning engagement processes to understand what allows some to participate and places barriers in front of others (Yiftachel, 1998) to fulfill the three principles guaranteeing the "vote and voice" of citizenship (Sonnicksen, 2016).
Last, practitioners are open to these ideas:
Przydatek (2012) finds planners willing to consider Burton and Mitchell's (2006) principles, and Hockey
et al.'s (2013) survey of planners acknowledges the most marginalized older adults are not being heard through their processes. There is an opportunity for planners to show leadership in enabling citizenship for PLWD by enabling their voice in the city-building process (Bartlett & O'Connor, 2010; Bryden, 2005; Swaffer, 2014).
Participatory Planning Tools: Accessible to Whom?
With the communicative and collaborative turns in plan- ning theory, there has been a shift in seeing a key role for the planner as a skilled facilitator helping communities define their own future vision (Healey, 1996; Innes, 1995). This work has included critiques of the planning process as being exclusionary toward marginalized populations. What constitutes a well-designed process in terms of pub- lic engagement is multifaceted and ranges from the mac- roscale (overall design) to the microscale (experiences at specific activities). Bryson et al. (2013) summarizes the extant literature and provides 12 guidelines for practi- tioners from managing power relations and establishing clear rules to using evaluation measures. One guideline argues for inclusive practices, stating the importance of creating a process that brings people to the discussion who are "normally excluded by institutionalized inequities" (Bryson et al., 2013, p. 29). De Souza Briggs's (1998) argu- ment is salient, arguing that although what constitutes good values in terms of public engagement (macroscale) is important, it is how interactions play out at the micro- scale of the tools used that affects how people participate in the planning process.
Existing microscale research has included, for
instance, the micropolitics of deliberation within commu- nity groups, participatory budgeting in lower income communities, and effectiveness of visualizations in local climate change planning processes (Barnes et al., 2004; Mel,endez, 2018; Schroth et al., 2015). However, these stud- ies assume these public engagement tools are already accessible to members of the public. This is significant because in not dealing with the microscale, current plan- ning participation discourse neglects an inquiry into how
 individuals with disabilities access the planning process in a material way. Although alternative public engagement tools like photovoice and go-along interviews have been used to engage people with cognitive and intellectual impairments, the typical public engagement tools used in the planning process (e.g., open houses, town hall meet- ings, focus groups, etc.) remain understudied (Mathers, 2008; Mathers et al., 2010; McClimens et al., 2014).

Understanding Experiences at Open Houses
Instead of conceiving of a new public engagement tool, I decided to explore experiences of PLWD at an existing, widely used one (the open house) and analyze those findings to understand how to make it more accessible. This was to capture real situations to provide for easier education of and adoption by practitioners. Although I focus on one typically used tool in the planning pro- cess, the findings from this study are situated within a




broader context of diverse public engagement mecha- nisms and could be applicable to them as well (Rowe & Frewer, 2005). Current planning practice normally uses an open house to present a proposed plan or project and then garner feedback from members of the public regarding a variety of topics at diverse scales, from infill developments to citywide plans. Led by municipal or nonprofit staff or private planning consultants working for the public entity (herein referred to as staff), an open house is usually informal and has a few key compo- nents, like visual presentation boards, available staff, and formalized feedback (Swerhun & AvRuskin, 2012). In this study I ask: What are the barriers and facilitators to par- ticipation for PLWD at open houses?
Before selecting methods to answer this question, I examined existing research with PLWD that may affect their experiences at an open house. This literature helped outline the themes used during the subsequent framework analysis of the data (Gale et al., 2013). First is research on communication with PLWD, including best practices and communication training programs in care settings, as well as evidence that the latter reduced agi- tation in PLWD (Livingston et al., 2014; O'Brien et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2012). Important communication considerations offered include ensuring the PLWD feels respected by taking the time to listen to their opinions (Hung et al., 2017) and treating the PLWD as a unique individual (Downs & Collins, 2015). My current research expands that knowledge to a noncare setting, where the staff do not have prior knowledge that the person is living with dementia. Second, the physical/sensory environment of the open house deserves study, because it has been shown that the design of care home settings can influence a PLWD's wellbeing and influence how well people wayfind (Chaudhury & Cooke, 2014; Chaudhury et al., 2018; Hung et al., 2017; O'Malley et al., 2017). For instance, PLWD can be sensi- tive to noise and light, which, if mismanaged, can cause over- or understimulation (Dewing, 2009). Further, a sys- tematic review of the interior design of congregate liv- ing facilities discusses the need to prevent sensory
 overload (Chaudhury et al., 2018). Although not previ-
ously researched, these studies point to the potential importance of the environment for supporting engage- ment of PLWD. Third, the presentation of the informa- tion at the open house is significant because this determines whether information is understandable to the public and garners productive feedback (Hodge & Gordon, 2014). An open house uses visuals to depict information, which could pose an issue for PLWD, because one symptom of dementia is difficulty in think- ing abstractly (Alzheimer Society of Canada, 2018).
However, these visual depictions of space can be related to visual art, which has been used as a form of therapy (art-making/viewing) for PLWD. It is also
effective in research with PLWD, and has the potential to increase communication (Dupuis, Whyte et al., 2012; Rosenberg, 2009; Young et al., 2016).
For method selection, I reviewed those already used to explore the microscale of public participation, including video capture to conduct discourse analysis (Mel,endez, 2018) and examining public forums using participant observation and postactivity interviews (Barnes et al., 2004). I then adapted these methods based on special considerations for working with PLWD in social science research of "inclusion, empowerment, flexibility, and communication" and stressing the importance of time for repeat contact (Phillipson & Hammond, 2018, p. 1). Further, existing work confirmed methods used in the microscale literature (Hung et al., 2017; Keady et al., 2018; Lacey-Avon, 2016).
Before attending any open houses, I spent about 10 to 15 h with each participant, building trust and familiar- ity with their communication styles, which allowed me to adapt questions to help the participants express themselves comfortably. This research is also part of a larger study examining their experiences in their home neighborhoods, not related to specific planning proc- esses. My study involves formal one-on-one data gener- ation activities, including semistructured interviews; go- along interviews in their neighborhoods; 2 weeks of glo- bal positioning system tracking, travel diary writing, and experiential sampling methods with a smartphone app (including near-daily interactions about using the differ- ent tools); and second go-along interviews with photo elicitation. Crucially, several informal hours were spent troubleshooting various gadgets and informally chatting before, after, and in between formal activities. The small sample size is appropriate given the methodology I use in this research; however, it also reflects the challenges in recruiting this population and building the rapport required to foster trust and familiarity, as well as estab- lishing meaningful research interactions through pro- longed engagement (Keady et al., 2018; Lincoln & Guba 1985; Phillipson & Hammond, 2018).

Participants
I recruited participants through community organiza- tions and allied networks that serve PLWD in the Regional Municipality of Waterloo (Canada), located approximately 100 km west of Toronto. Waterloo is a midsized urban region of 601,220 people mostly charac- terized by post–World War II car-dependent suburban built form, except for three urbanized downtown areas (Miller et al., 2014; Region of Waterloo, 2019). The num- ber of PLWD was projected to increase 187% between 2011 and 2036, from 6,365 PLWD to 18,314 (Hopkins, 2010). This was a voluntary convenience sample; all par- ticipants had dementia, were self-identified to be in the







Subject of open house
No. of people
present Participant(s)
Condition causing dementia symptoms (self-
reported diagnosis) Pseudonym

1
Proposal for redevelopment of a downtown
20
Male, 71 years
Early onset
Alzheimer's disease
Joe

street and public parkette. The purpose of
the open house was to view the proposal

Female, 81 yearsa
Alzheimer's
disease
Lorraine

and provide feedback on the design.



2
Updating a neighborhood plan. The purpose of the open house was to discuss the plan parameters and future processes and seek feedback from the public about what they liked/did not like about their area and what they wanted to see in the future.
75
Female, 81 years
Alzheimer's
disease
Lorraine
3
Proposal for improving a thoroughfare under a bridge. The purpose of the open house was to view the proposal and provide feedback on the design.
12
Male, 65 years
Early onset
Alzheimer's disease
George
4
Proposal for a new public park to be built in
15
Male, 65 years
Early onset
Alzheimer's disease
Douglas

the municipality. The purpose of the open
house was to view the proposal and

Male, 58 years
Parkinson's
disease
Alexander

provide feedback on the design.



5
Proposal for expansion of a cultural facility.
20
Female, 57 years
Early onset
Alzheimer's disease
Violet

The purpose of the open house was to
understand what the community might

Female, 56 years
Early onset
Alzheimer's disease
Elizabeth

want to see in the expanded facility.



Note: a. This participant went to two meetings. She had such a good time at the first meeting that she wanted to go to a second.

earlier stages, and lived in their own homes in a typo- logically defined suburban neighborhood. Participants are identified by pseudonyms in Table 1 (Farthing, 2015; Gordon, 2019). This research project received ethics approval from the University of Waterloo Office of Research Ethics (ORE No. 31658) and used process con- sent (McKeown et al., 2010).5

Protocol
I systematically examined community newspapers and municipal websites for advertisements for open houses in the region to identify one near each participant's resi- dence. Together, we did a site visit and then attended the open house. We did this because most open houses were at indoor venues (e.g., places of worship, city halls) and did not take place at the site/area under review.
Participants were told that we were attending a public event about a proposed project or plan (Table 2) in their municipality, and we were there to learn about the pro- posal and provide feedback. We did not indicate to staff that we were there to conduct a study. This was to ensure that staff did not change their behavior based on the knowledge that the participant was a PLWD. To capture the experience, I used four diverse qualitative data generation techniques to ensure persistent obser- vation of participants and improve the trustworthiness of the findings through methodological triangulation
(Farmer et al., 2006; Hall & Rist, 1999; Hastings, 2012; Lincoln & Guba, 1985). These methods complement one another, capturing diverse aspects of the experi- ence from multiple perspectives to produce thick descriptions ensuring transferability of the findings, from the audio recording to photographs in the moment, to post-experience field notes and sketches, and, finally, informal member-checking with the partici- pant in a post interview (Table 2; Lincoln & Guba, 1985).

Data Analysis
I used the framework method because it organizes data in a way that helps answer direct research questions (Gale et al., 2013). I attended all meetings personally with participants and thoroughly reviewed the data.
Based on this knowledge, deep engagement with the literature on what might affect the experiences of PLWD at open houses, and peer debriefing with col- leagues, I developed an overall coding framework (out- lined previously; Figure 2). A research assistant and I coded the data using this framework.

Limitations
My presence at the open house might be considered a limitation. To mitigate this, I did my best not to interfere with the experience (e.g., refraining from explaining visual




Data generation technique Protocol Rationale
Audio recording of the open house meeting
An audio recording was started at the entrance into the open house meeting and ended upon the exit from the building.
It was used to help the researcher recall certain instances and to review and develop a better understanding of the data.
Photographs of the open house location and visual materials
Photographs were taken with a cellphone camera of visual materials (poster boards, presentation slides, handouts, comment sheets).
This was used to augment the audio recordings and field notes during data analysis for a visual reminder of the experience.
Field notes and sketches
Maps were sketched after every open house and recorded the movement of participant(s), staff, and members of the public.
Recorded the number of people present and other observations related to the research question and framework.
Recording field notes after the meeting was used to capture information not voiced on the audio recording.
Post–open house interviews with participant(s)
Conducted an interview with the participants as soon as they left the open house. Asked questions about overall impressions; the physical/sensory setting; whether the information was too little, too much, or just right; whether they felt like their voices were being heard; the attitudes of the staff toward them; and the presentation of visual materials.
This post–open house interview was an opportunity for the participant(s) to express in their own words their experiences at the meeting and also a way to perform an informal member-check with participants about what happened during the meeting.

Figure 2. Framework method code diagram.

boards), and I limited my staff interactions. Further, although I was able to analyze body language in the moment, I was not able to closely review the interactions (because they were not videotaped). Another potential 
 limitation is that I selected the open houses, and partici- 
 pants' interest (or lack thereof) in the topic might have 
 influenced how invested they were in the open house. 
 Last, participants were all White, with English as their first 
 language, representing a particular experience.


Findings and Discussion
My findings demonstrate that several accommodations could be made not only to an open house format to make it more accessible to PLWD but also to other pub- lic engagement tools. This is important because many planners use a variety of these tools within their larger planning processes. The resultant recommendations based on the findings are minor, could be implemented quickly with little cost, and are generalized for applica- blility to other public engagement mechanisms
(Table 3).
Communication: Staff's Approach Matters Staff interaction was most cited by participants, which is congruent with the literature discussing the importance of respectful social interactions for PLWD (Hung et al., 2017). When asked whether staff were easy to under- stand, all participants stated they had no difficulties.
However, through observation during the open house, I noted that when staff did any of the following, partici- pants tended to exhibit closed body language or revert to talking about prior topics: spoke quickly or over the participant, used planning jargon, and/or put unneces- sary pressure on the participant to ask a question.
Conversely, when staff used less specialized language, spoke at a slower cadence, and approached participants in a respectful/friendly manner without rushing, partici- pants would nod and ask follow-up questions. For instance, in comparing service in a caf,e to the open house during the interview, George remarked:

They [caf,e staff] were saying, "What do you want? Have you decided yet? Can I help you?" You're not helping me interrupting me looking at the sign. So he [staff]




Theme Recommendations for practice
Communication: Your approach matters Treat each person with respect. Give your full attention to the person and be aware of your body
language (preference for open stances).
Be patient by giving people space and time to understand information at their own pace. Do not make them feel rushed: Sometimes it is better to be quiet while people think.
Avoid jargon and ask whether the person wants to have something explained or volunteer a digestible piece of information about visual displays.
Physical/sensory environment: Sensory Seek spaces that lower the potential amount of noise (e.g., carpeted floors). Ensure the space is stimulation þ room setup evenly and well lit, with no reflections on the ground. Daylight is preferable.
Location should be easy to find: Use clear, large-format signage with arrows and photographs of the place you are indicating.
Within the room, create signs that direct participants to boards, seating areas, commenting area, registration table, washrooms, etc.
Set up presentation boards in a peripheral circular formation. Clearly indicate the order and where to start.
Presentation of information: All forms of information (handouts, feedback mechanisms, presentations, etc.) should be clearly and Less is (often) more concisely written and presented visually (e.g., use short sentences, plain language, bullet points,
large font, and, when appropriate, labeled color graphics/photographs).
Make the purpose and desired feedback a short and clear message. Restate in all materials. Presentation boards should tell a story, making it clear how they relate from one to the next.
Gather feedback "in the moment" from participants. (e.g., record information in real time, offer sticky notes/emoji stickers to comment directly on materials, or offer to write down comments).

was great. … It's not a very pleasant thing when they are rushing you through because of their timetable.
Staff whom participants perceived positively took their time, engaged not only by listening but by prob- ing further, tried to find common ground (e.g., asking how the participant related to the site), and offered more information. For PLWD, research shows that even those in later stages may not remember what exactly was said, but they remember how someone made them feel (Bryden, 2005). This was evident for partici- pants. For instance, Lorraine said, "I'm trying to remem- ber exactly what he said, and I don't [remember]. But I didn't feel anyone was talking down to me or anything like that." When staff used this kind of respectful, wel-
project?" This was a great way for the staff to orient the participants, because they often did not volunteer ideas until after the staff had provided explanations. This led to the participant asking questions and interacting, whereas staff who walked away after the first question left the participant seeming confused and not engaging with the material further. Interestingly, most open houses had staff present, and the feeling of being heard seemed to be influenced by how staff interacted.

Physical/Sensory Environment: Sensory Stimulation Plus Room Setup
Consistent with literature on congregate living settings
for PLWD, noise and lighting were important considera-
coming approach (i.e., not speaking down to them or
tions. A
(or threat of it) was consid-
using "elderspeak" (Eggenberger et al., 2013), partici- pants noticed. Participants seemed more comfortable with those who spoke to them like a "regular person" and would ask questions without prompting. Lorraine said, "I thought he was pretty neat, he just talked to us like a regular person. … I think he was just basically talk- ing to us as people. He didn't have his planner hat on."
Taking the time to connect what they were saying to the presentation boards by pointing, giving exam- ples, and waiting for the participant to nod/assent before moving on was beneficial to participants, who would go from looking confused to engaged. In a few instances, staff were proactive and approached partici- pants by asking, "Do you have any questions?" and if the participant looked confused, they would follow up with, "Would you like me to tell you a bit about the
ered a barrier and can make concentrating difficult for
PLWD, as George remarked during the interview:

Researcher: If it was noisy, how would that have changed your experience?

George: I'd have left then. Control the environment or get out.

Noise was influenced by the



Participants described most
open houses as providing
which is supported by literature as important in terms of engagement for PLWD (Chaudhury et al., 2018).





Figure 3. Sketches of peripheral circular layouts.

Some participants cited sensory overload as a barrier to comfort level/comprehension because some open houses took place in echoing auditory environments with various conflicting lighting sources (see Figures A1 and A2 in the Technical Appendix).
Participants tended to get restless around the 1-h mark; however, this depended on how well the different presentation formats engaged them, how interested they were in the content, and whether they felt they had something to contribute. Douglas mentioned in an interview that staying any longer than 1.5 h would have been "too much." In addition, if participants were look- ing at boards at their own pace and conversing, meet- ings were perceived as shorter. I observed that being
 able to control one's own movement around the room 
 and being active (standing, interpreting visual informa- 
 tion, conversing) seemed to result in enjoyment for par- ticipants and seemingly more cognitive and
physical engagement.
 Legibility of an environment is important for PLWD in terms of feeling comfortable (Burton & Mitchell, 2006; O'Malley et al., 2017), and the findings are consistent with this. One barrier to legibility was the observed lack of signage outside and inside the buildings. However, the setup of open houses was usually legible for
participants, including presentation boards placed around the edge of the room in a peripheral circular lay- 
 out (Figure 3). During the interview, participants said they liked not being the "center of attention," and the legibility of the layout meant they "knew where to go" and were able to easily "follow the story" of the poster boards. This layout made interactions less stressful by enabling staff to approach participants in a less confron- tational way, allowing participants to move away if they chose to, and permitting them to move at their own pace. Participants preferred this; seated presentations forced them to learn at someone else's pace.
Familiarity is another important design principle for PLWD (Burton & Mitchell, 2006), and participants were more engaged and at ease if they had a personal con- nection to the proposal and/or the meeting location was at a place they recognized. One open house was hosted in the foyer of a church and Alexander described it as a reassuring experience: "I just walked in and I felt like I was at home almost." It was observed and stated in the interviews with PLWD that the ideal physical/sen- sory environment would minimize aspects of an open house that can make it harder to concentrate and cre- ate opportunities for breaks from conversation. This can be done by mitigating noise levels, ensuring consistent




Figure 4. Presentation board with legible design and opportunity for in-the-moment feedback.

lighting, making the setup of the room as legible and familiar as possible, and providing opportunities for par- 
 ticipants to opt in or out of a conversation.

Presentation of Information: Less Is (Often) More
Closely intertwined with the physical setup of a room is
the presentation of visual, auditory, and written informa- tion. Typically, an open house includes handouts, pres- entation boards, a presentation, and different methods for providing feedback.
In terms of format, common barriers identified by participants across all materials included being too diffi- 
 cult to read, with 4-line sentences and paragraphs, small 
 fonts, blurry graphics, and small posters (see Figures A3–A5 for examples in the Technical Appendix). In the absence of presentation boards, I observed that partici- pants seemed to disengage from the open house, look- ing confused and stating they did not feel involved.
Long presentations (30–50 min) led to restlessness and decreased comprehension among participants: They fell asleep, admitted that they stopped paying attention, and/or forgot why they were there. In terms of provid- ing feedback, written comment sheets were the most common. Participants stated they had nothing to say
(despite animated discussions throughout) and, if they chose to write comments, would often write about the last thing seen, suggesting comments made earlier might have been forgotten. Another feedback collec- tion method required participants to state preferences in front of a group. This made Elizabeth and Violet feel "awkward, uncomfortable," and not consulted.6
In terms of content, common barriers included
 unlabeled visuals, overcomplicated drawings, jargon, unnecessary text and unrelated information7 (confus-
 ing), and too many visual boards (too much information led to fewer comments). These barriers are contrasted with the fact that well-crafted visuals were consistently the most cited facilitator because participants could understand the diagram, relate it to a physical location, and get a better understanding by talking with staff.
This increased engagement corresponds with literature on using visual art to engage PLWD (Young et al., 2016). Drawings providing enough information without over- burdening the participant with unnecessary information were well received. Figure 4 is the board several PWLD speak about here:

Douglas: The drawing spoke.

Alexander: It just spoke to me, like, it jumped out.




D: Two baseball fields, got a nice green field, one that could be something else. You got the forest that the people walk through with their dogs and kids and everything. They planned it.

A: Everything was right in place, for you to see what they were actually going to do.

Another facilitator was photography used for precedent images. Once the term was explained to participants by staff, they had plenty to comment on (see Figure A6 in the Technical Appendix). This corresponds to research on wayfinding signage for PLWD: Real-life photographs are more legible than icons or diagrams (Biglieri, 2017): "Yeah, those boxes right away I knew that they had to be [a] vegetable garden. … The pictures and stuff were explanatory in what they were trying to say" (Alexander). There were also unique cases for each medium. For presentations, facilitators included provid- ing relevant content, ensuring jargon-free language at a slower pace, visuals, and allowing people to ask ques- tions frequently. For feedback formats, sticky notes were effective for expressing in-the-moment thoughts, elimi- nating the need to recall every thought they had over the course of an hour plus (Figures A7 and A8 in the Technical Appendix). However, participants were most likely to share their opinions with staff verbally, as opposed to writing things down. Striking the balance between too little and too much information is a diffi- cult line for practitioners to walk. The case can be made that less detail and more concise statements, drawings, and directions might lead to better understanding.
Finally, the need for a clear, targeted message
throughout the open house was evident. When the pur- pose of the open house was not clear, I observed par- ticipant confusion. The main question posed to the public was often, "What are your comments?" an open- ended question without adequate direction on the feedback desired. For instance, one open house pre- sented 10 presentation boards and asked participants
to "give us feedback on this design" without offering alternatives or prompting the attendees to comment on certain aspects. This confused participants; however, when I suggested to the participant during the open house they look for things they did or did not like, they had a more engaged conversation. Further, being cued to why we were at the open house made participants re-engage in discussions if distracted. Unfortunately, all of the open houses assumed attendees knew exactly what the staff wanted and assumed a level of technical expertise. One way to combat this would be to reiterate in a simple, concise way the purpose and question(s) of
 the open house throughout all means of interaction 
 and materials.
Unexpected Results: Comfort Plus Citizenship
An emergent finding was the comforting effect that my
presence had on participants. It made them feel safe in a new place, provided someone to ask questions of, and prompted them to engage. Although my presence was important, it does not negate the other findings from this research, because many go to open houses with a familiar person. As George suggested, a potential outreach program could pair planning students/practi- tioners with PLWD in the community as companions to attend community meetings of the person's choice for added support. This finding cannot replace the recom- mendations I make in this study, but it could serve to augment the experience.
Finally, considering that PLWD are often confronted with stigmatization and are presumed incapable in soci- etal discourse, perhaps the most important emergent finding was the sense of inclusion, citizenship, and con- nection felt by participants in attending these open houses. Many talked about how good it made them feel to be included and asked for their opinions about their community, even if the meeting was not entirely accessible to them. After their first meeting, Lorraine asked me if she could go to another, purely for enjoy- ment and the connection to community she felt.
Douglas said it felt good to use his "noggin" and share his knowledge. Others felt they had the opportunity to teach me, which is something they had not done in a long time. Participants also felt "heard" and included. Georege said, "They made it very inclusive … because the small voice still needs to be heard."
This type of language seems to be language atyp- ical of people being placated by a planning process but rather of people feeling like they were a meaningful part of city building.

A Step Toward a More Inclusive Planning Process
Research on the impact of communication and design on PLWD has been primarily in the context of care set- tings (Chaudhury et al., 2018; Hung et al., 2017), and the accessibility of the planning process has not been examined. PLWD deserve to have a voice in this process, to (re)shape the places they live in. Examining this aspect of their relationship with the state is integral, because the state (at the municipal level) is most likely to make decisions that can differentially affect their experiences in their neighborhoods, for better or worse (Fainstein, 2010). Yet the examination of this relationship and inclusion of the disabled community within aca- demic planning journals remains scant (McCormick
et al., 2019).



With this study I begin to fill this gap by answering a fundamental unanswered question in planning pro- cess research: Are the public engagement tools used by planners accessible to all? I do this through a new way of studying the microscale with participatory methods to understand the needs of PLWD during a public engagement activity, ultimately resulting in easy-to- implement, cost-effective recommendations for a widely used tool that could result in more widespread adoption in practice and could be extended to
other types of engagement tools used during the plan- ning process (e.g., design charrettes). Table 3 provides a proposed recommendations checklist for practi-
tioner use.
The open house layout is already well suited to the needs of PLWD and could be replicated in other engagement tools. Further recommendations include ensuring respectful, patient communication (not rush- ing, using plain language); providing clear, concise presentation materials (less is more; offering in-the- moment feedback opportunities); using a familiar, comfortable physical location (noting acoustics and lighting); and ensuring the purpose of the public engagement activity is reiterated throughout in mul- tiple formats. Because this study was done with
PLWD in earlier stages, more intensive supports might be required for those in later stages. Nonetheless, equipping planners with these dementia-inclusive rec- ommendations in a rights-based (non-paternalistic) manner could also serve as an opportunity to combat the stigmatization of PLWD, enabling them to exert their power as citizens in city-building conversations. Finding an advocate for this marginalized group is not enough (Fainstein, 2010), nor is creating a dementia-specific advisory group. The public engage- ment tools commonly used in the planning process must become universally accessible so that PLWD
and other people with disabilities can have the agency to attend any meeting they choose in their community and have an impact on decision making.
The changes I propose in this study go beyond ensuring meetings are scheduled in locations and with services that are accessible (which is commonly under- stood as providing Americans With Disability Act mini- mums; Bryson et al., 2013). This methodology could be used to give feedback to planners running engagement sessions on experiences of historically marginalized indi- viduals, encouraging evaluation and better practices, and in combination with macroscale examinations of accessibility and inclusion in an overall engagement process (Slotterback & Lauria, 2019). This work adds to a burgeoning literature on compassion in planning (Lyles & Swearingen White, 2019) by demonstrating what accessibility in the public engagement process might look like for people with diverse cognitive impairments.
Finally, this research emphasizes the imperative for plan- ners to work with people with cognitive or intellectual impairments and people with disabilities generally to better understand what accessibility means for them, in terms of both planning processes and outcomes.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
SAMANTHA BIGLIERI (samantha.biglieri@ryerson.ca) is an assistant professor in the School of Urban and Regional Planning at Ryerson University. She is a practicing planner, candidate member of the Ontario Professional Planners Institute, and member of the Canadian Institute of Planners.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I extend sincere gratitude to all of the participants involved in the study and to Dr. Jennifer Dean and Katherine Chan of the School of Planning at the University of Waterloo for
their support.



RESEARCH SUPPORT
This work was supported by an Ontario Graduate Scholarship while the author was at the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.


SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Supplemental data for this article can be found on the publisher's website.


NOTES
In this study, I use three important terms: planning process (bringing a proposed plan or development through government procedures); public engagement tools (used to give information to/garner feedback from community members; e.g., open houses); and participation (attend and use public engagement tools).
Dementia is caused by a variety of different diseases, the most common being Alzheimer's disease, which is progressive without a known cure (70%–80% of all cases; WHO, 2017).
OPPI Statement of Values: "Foster public participation. Members believe in meaningful public participation by all individuals and groups and seek to articulate the needs of those whose interests have not been represented." OPPI Professional Code of Practice: "1.4 Identify and promote opportunities for meaningful participation in the planning process to all interested parties" (OPPI, 2019). AICP Code of Ethics: "We shall give people the opportunity to have a meaningful impact on the development of plans and programs that may affect them. Participation should be broad enough to include those who lack formal organization or influence" (AICP, 2016).
Biomedical and personhood approaches persist in practice and scholarship, despite changes in how PLWD are viewed
in discourse.
Process consent involves the researcher asking for verbal consent in each research stage. Participants sign a consent form at the beginning of the larger study but explain and reconfirm consent prior to each activity.




At one meeting, participants felt their voices were not heard, likely due to how feedback was sought and presented (no visuals, irrelevant handout, long presentation).
For example, one handout was not related to the open house, which confused participants further.



REFERENCES
Alzheimer Society of Canada. (2010). Rising tide: The impact of dementia on Canadian society. Toronto, ON. http://www.alz- heimer.ca/~/media/Files/national/Advocacy/ASC_Rising_Tide_ Full_Report_e.pdf
Alzheimer Society of Canada. (2018). 10 warning signs. http:// alzheimer.ca/en/Home/About-dementia/Alzheimers-disease/10- warning-signs
American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP). (2016). Code of ethics. https://www.planning.org/ethics/ethicscode.htm Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of Planners, 35(4), 216–224. https:// doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225
Barnes, M., Knops, A., Newman, J., & Sullivan, H. (2004). Recent research: The micro-politics of deliberation: Case stud- ies in public participation. Contemporary Politics, 10(2), 93–110. https://doi.org/10.1080/1356977042000278756 Bartlett, R., & O'Connor, D. (2010). Broadening the dementia debate: Towards social citizenship. Policy Press.
Biglieri, S. (2017). Implementing dementia-friendly land use planning: An evaluation of current literature and financial impli- cations for greenfield development in suburban Canada.
Planning Practice & Research, 33(3), 1–290. https://doi.org/10. 1080/02697459.2017.1379336
Brorsson, A., O€ hman, A., Cutchin, M., & Nyga˚ rd, L. (2013).
Managing critical incidents in grocery shopping by community- living people with Alzheimer's disease. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 20(4), 292–301. https://doi.org/10.3109/
11038128.2012.752031
Brorsson, A., O€ hman, A., Lundberg, S., & Nyga˚ rd, L. (2016). Being a pedestrian with dementia: A qualitative study using photo documentation and focus group interviews. Dementia, 15(5), 1124–1140. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301214555406
Bryden, C. (2005). Dancing with dementia: My story of living positively with dementia. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Bryson, J. M., Moynihan, D. P., Quick, K. S., Slotterback, C. S., & Crosby, B. C. (2013). Designing public participation proc- esses. Public Administration Review, 73(1), 23–34. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2012.02678.x
Burton, E., & Mitchell, L. (2006). Inclusive urban design: Streets for life. Elsevier.
Chaudhury, H., & Cooke, H. (2014). Design matters in dementia care: The role of the physical environment in dementia care set- tings. In M. Downs & B. Bowers (Eds.), Excellence in dementia care (2nd ed., pp. 144–158). Open University Press.
Chaudhury, H., Cooke, H. A., Cowie, H., & Razaghi, L. (2018). The influence of the physical environment on residents with dementia in long-term care settings: A review of the empirical literature. The Gerontologist, 58(5), e325–e337. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/geront/gnw259
Corburn, J. (2009). Toward the healthy city: People, places, and the politics of urban planning. MIT Press.
Dear, M., Wilton, R., Gaber, S. L., & Takahashi, L. (1997). Seeing people differently: The sociospatial construction of
disability. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 15(4), 455–480. https://doi.org/10.1068/d150455
de Souza Briggs, X. (1998). Doing democracy up-close: Culture, power, and communication in community building. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 18(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0739456X9801800101
Dewing, J. (2009). Caring for people with dementia: noise and light. Nursing Older People, 21(5), 34–38. https://doi.org/10. 7748/nop2009.06.21.5.34.c7102
Downs, M., & Collins, L. (2015). Person-centred communication in dementia care. Nursing Standard (Royal College of Nursing (Great Britain): 1987), 30(11), 37–41. https://doi.org/10.7748/ ns.30.11.37.s45
Duggan, S., Blackman, T., Martyr, A., & Van Schaik, P. (2008). The impact of early dementia on outdoor life: A shrinking world? Dementia, 7(2), 191–204. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301208091158
Dupuis, S. L., Gillies, J., Carson, J., Whyte, C., Genoe, R., Loiselle, L., & Sadler, L. (2012). Moving beyond patient and cli- ent approaches: Mobilizing "authentic partnerships" in demen- tia care, support and services. Dementia, 11(4), 427–452. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301211421063
Dupuis, S. L., Whyte, C., Carson, J., Genoe, R., Meshino, L., & Sadler, L. (2012). Just dance with me: An authentic partnership approach to understanding leisure in the dementia context.
World Leisure Journal, 54(3), 240–254. https://doi.org/10.1080/
04419057.2012.702454
Edick, C., Holland, N., Ashbourne, J., Elliott, J., & Stolee, P. (2017). A review of Canadian and international dementia strat- egies. Healthcare Management Forum, 30(1), 32–39. https:// doi.org/10.1177/0840470416664533
Eggenberger, E., Heimerl, K., & Bennett, M. I. (2013). Communication skills training in dementia care: A systematic review of effectiveness, training content, and didactic methods in different care settings. International Psychogeriatrics, 25(3), 345–358. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610212001664 Fainstein, S. S. (2010). The just city. Cornell University Press.
Farmer, T., Robinson, K., Elliott, S. J., & Eyles, J. (2006). Developing and implementing a triangulation protocol for qualitative health research. Qualitative Health Research, 16(3), 377–394. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305285708 Farthing, S. (2015). Research design in urban planning: A stu- dent's guide. SAGE Publications.
Gale, N. K., Heath, G., Cameron, E., Rashid, S., & Redwood, S. (2013). Using the framework method for the analysis of qualita- tive data in multi-disciplinary health research. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 13, 117–118. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2288-13-117
Goodley, D. (2011). Disability studies: An interdisciplinary intro- duction. SAGE Publications Ltd.
Gordon, D. (2019). Kitchener-Waterloo-Cambridge: Transportation T9 method. http://canadiansuburbs.ca/files/ Kitchener_T9_2016.pdf
Hall, A. L., & Rist, R. C. (1999). Integrating multiple qualitative research methods (or avoiding the precariousness of a one-leg- ged stool). Psychology & Marketing, 16(4), 291–304. https:// doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6793(199907)16:4 < 291::AID- MAR2 > 3.0.CO;2-%23
Hastings, S. L. (2012). Triangulation. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), Encyclopedia of research design (pp. 1538–1540). SAGE. Healey, P. (1996). The communicative turn in planning theory and its implications for spatial strategy formation. Environment




and Planning B: Planning and Design, 23(2), 217–234. https:// doi.org/10.1068/b230217
Hockey, A., Phillips, J., & Walford, N. (2013). Planning for an ageing society: Voices from the planning profession. Planning Practice and Research, 28(5), 527–543. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02697459.2013.820039
Hodge, G., & Gordon, D. (2014). Planning Canadian commun- ities (6th ed.). Nelson Education.
Hopkins, R. W. (2010). Dementia projections for the counties, regional municipalities, and census divisions of Ontario. PCCC Mental Health Services. http://www.alzheimertoronto.org/pdf/ brochures/Hopkins2010.pdf
Hung, L., Phinney, A., Chaudhury, H., Rodney, P., Tabamo, J., & Bohl, D. (2017). "Little things matter!" Exploring the perspec- tives of patients with dementia about the hospital environment. International Journal of Older People Nursing, 12, 3. https:// doi.org/10.1111/opn.12153
Innes, J. (1995). Planning theory's emerging paradigm: Communicative action and interactive practice. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 14(3), 183–189. https://doi. org/10.1177/0739456X9501400307
Keady, J., Hyde,n, L. C., Johnson, A., & Swarbrick, C. (Eds.). (2018). Social research methods in dementia studies: Inclusion and innovation. Routledge.
Lacey-Avon, S. (2016). Examining the livability of a day program for individuals with Alzheimer's disease and other memory- related disorders: A case study of The Dotsa Bitove Wellness Academy [Master's thesis]. University of Waterloo.
Lefebvre, H. (1996). Writings on cities (E. Koffman & E. Lebas, Trans.). Blackwell.
Lin, S. Y., & Lewis, F. M. (2015). Dementia friendly, dementia capable, and dementia positive: Concepts to prepare for the future. The Gerontologist, 55(2), 237–244. https://doi.org/10. 1093/geront/gnu122
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. SAGE. Livingston, G., Kelly, L., Lewis-Holmes, E., Baio, G., Morris, S., Patel, N., Omar, R. Z., Katona, C., & Cooper, C. (2014). Non- pharmacological interventions for agitation in dementia: Systematic review of randomised controlled trials. The British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science, 205(6), 436–442. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.113.141119
Lord, A., Mair, M., Sturzaker, J., & Jones, P. (2017). "The plan- ners' dream goes wrong?" Questioning citizen-centred plan- ning. Local Government Studies, 43(3), 344–363. https://doi. org/10.1080/03003930.2017.1288618
Lyles, W., & Swearingen White, S. (2019). Who cares? Arnstein's ladder, the emotional paradox of public engage- ment, and (re)imagining planning as caring. Journal of the American Planning Association, 85(3), 287–300. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/01944363.2019.1612268
Mann, J. (2020). Canadian charter of rights for people with dementia. Dementia, 19(1), 63–67. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301219876503
Mathers, A. R. (2008). Hidden voices: The participation of peo- ple with learning disabilities in the experience of public open space. Local Environment, 13(6), 515–529. https://doi.org/10. 1080/13549830802259912
Mathers, A. R., Thwaites, K., Simkins, I. M., & Mallett, R. (2010). Beyond participation: The practical application of an empower- ment process to bring about environmental and social change. Journal of Human Development, Disability and Social Change, 19(3), 37–57.
McClimens, A., Partridge, N., & Sexton, E. (2014). How do peo- ple with learning disability experience the city centre? A Sheffield case study. Health & Place, 28, 14–21. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.02.014
McCormick, L., Schwartz, A., & Passerini, C. (2019). Housing for people with disabilities: A review of state Olmstead and HUD consolidated plans. Journal of Planning Education and Research. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0739456X19844567
McKeown, J., Clarke, A., Ingleton, C., & Repper, J. (2010). Actively involving people with dementia in qualitative research. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 19(13–14), 1935–1943. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2009.03136.x
Mele,ndez, J. W. (2018). Studying learning in neighborhood level democratic activity. In R. Allen Hays (Ed.), Neighborhood change and neighborhood action: The struggle to create neighborhoods that serve human needs (pp. 91–122).
Lexington Books.
Miller, G., Burnstein, E., Weatherburn, T., Matar, H., Sharma, P., Campsie, P. (2014). Supporting the big shift with age friendly development. Prepared for The Region of Waterloo. Canadian Urban Institute. https://canurb.org/publications/sup- porting-the-big-shift-with-age-friendly-development/
Mitchell, G., Dupuis, S., & Kontos, P. (2013). Dementia dis- course: From imposed suffering to knowing other-wise. Journal of Applied Hermeneutics. https://doi.org/10.11575/jah.v0i2.
53220
Nedlund, A. C., & Nordh, J. (2015). Crafting citizen(ship) for people with dementia: How policy narratives at national level in Sweden informed politics of time from 1975 to 2013. Journal of Aging Studies, 34(34), 123–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag- ing.2015.06.003
O'Brien, R., Goldberg, S. E., Pilnick, A., Beeke, S., Schneider, J., Sartain, K., Thomson, L., Murray, M., Baxendale, B., & Harwood, R. H. (2018). The VOICE study: A before and after study of a dementia communication skills training course. PLoS One, 13(6), e0198567. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0198567
O'Malley, M., Innes, A., & Wiener, J. M. (2017). Decreasing spa- tial disorientation in care-home settings: How psychology can guide the development of dementia friendly design guidelines. Dementia, 16(3), 315–328. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301215591334
Ontario Professional Planners Institute. (2019). OPPI by-law. https://ontarioplanners.ca/become-an-rpp/oppi-membership/ oppi-by-law-update/oppi-by-law
Phillipson, L., & Hammond, A. (2018). More than talking: A scoping review of innovative approaches to qualitative research involving people with dementia. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1609406918782784
Przydatek, M. (2012). Remembering community settings: Exploring dementia-friendly urban design in British Columbian municipalities [Master's thesis]. University of Victoria, BC. http://hdl.handle.net/1828/5540.
Public Health Agency of Canada. (2018). Dementia in Canada, including Alzheimer's disease. https://www.canada.ca/content/ dam/phac-aspc/documents/services/publications/diseases-con- ditions/dementia-highlights-canadian-chronic-disease-surveil- lance/dementia-highlights-canadian-chronic-disease-surveil- lance.pdf
Region of Waterloo. (2019). Year-end 2018 population and household estimates for Waterloo region. Planning,




Development and Legislative Services: Report No. PDL-CPL-19-
14. https://www.regionofwaterloo.ca/en/regionalgovernment/ resources/Census/2018_Population_and_Household_Estimates_ for_Waterloo_Region_.pdf
Rosenberg, F. (2009). The MoMA Alzheimer's project: Programming and resources for making art accessible to peo- ple with Alzheimer's disease and their caregivers. Arts & Health, 1(1), 93–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17533010802528108
Rowe, G., & Frewer, L. J. (2005). A typology of public engage- ment mechanisms. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 30(2), 251–290. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243904271724
Schroth, O., Pond, E., & Sheppard, S. R. J. (2015). Evaluating presentation formats of local climate change in community planning with regard to process and outcomes. Landscape and Urban Planning, 142, 147–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.land- urbplan.2015.03.011
Shakespeare, T., Zeilig, H., & Mittler, P. (2019). Rights in mind: Thinking differently about dementia and disability. Dementia (London, England), 18(3), 1075–1088. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301217701506
Shoval, N. O. A. M., Wahl, H.-W., Auslander, G. A. I. L.,
Isaacson, M., Oswald, F., Edry, T., Landau, R. U. T. H., & Heinik, J. (2011). Use of the global positioning system to meas- ure the out-of-home mobility of older adults with differing cog- nitive functioning. Ageing and Society, 31(5), 849–869. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X10001455
Slotterback, C. S., & Lauria, M. (2019). Building a foundation for public engagement in planning. Journal of the American Planning Association, 85(3), 183–187. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01944363.2019.1616985
Sonnicksen, J. (2016). Dementia and representative democracy: Exploring challenges and implications for democratic citizen- ship. Dementia, 15(3), 330–342. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301216638998
Swaffer, K. (2014). Dementia: Stigma, language, and dementia- friendly. Dementia, 13(6), 709–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301214548143
Swerhun, N., & AvRuskin, V. (2012). Discuss, decide, do: The value of engagement as a decision-support tool. Swerhun. https://www.swerhun.com/discussdecidedo1/
Ward, R., Clark, A., Campbell, S., Graham, B., Kullberg, A., Manji, K., Rummery, K., & Keady, J. (2018). The lived neighbor- hood: Understanding how people with dementia engage with their local environment. International Psychogeriatrics, 30(6), 867–880. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610217000631 Williams-Roberts, H., Jeffery, B., Johnson, S., & Muhajarine, N. (2015). The effectiveness of healthy com- munity approaches on positive health outcomes in Canada and the United States. Social Sciences, 5(1), 3. https://doi. org/10.3390/socsci5010003
Wilson, R., Rochon, E., Leonard, C., & Mihailidis, A. (2012). Formal caregivers' perceptions of effective communication strategies while assisting residents with Alzheimer's disease during activities of daily living. Canadian Journal of Speech- Language Pathology and Audiology, 36(4), 314–331. http:// hdl.handle.net/1807/73482
World Health Organization. (2012). Dementia: A public health priority. World Health Organization. http://apps.who.int/iris/bit- stream/10665/75263/1/9789241564458_eng.pdf
World Health Organization. (2017). Global action plan on the public health response to dementia 2017–2025. http://apps. who.int/bookorders
Yiftachel, O. (1998). Planning and social control: Exploring the dark side. Journal of Planning Literature, 12(4), 395–406. https://doi.org/10.1177/088541229801200401
Young, R., Camic, P. M., & Tischler, V. (2016). The impact of community-based arts and health interventions on cognition in people with dementia: A systematic literature review. Aging & Mental Health, 20(4), 337–351. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13607863.2015.1011080