Chapter 12
Inclusive Design—Designing Barrier-Free Public Spaces

Suhani Arora and Aditi Deshpande



Abstract Interior design as a discipline places humans at the heart of the process and has an underlying commitment to inclusivity. The British Standards Institute (2005) defines inclusive design as: 'The design of mainstream products and/or services that are accessible to, and usable by, as many people as reasonably possible … without the need for special adaptation or specialised design (Inclusive Design Toolkit).' Inclu- sive design embraces diversity and enables cohesion among age groups, ethnicities, genders as well as mental and physical abilities. In the context of the Indian scenario, however, inclusive design is not incorporated into mainstream design. Thus, many public spaces remain inaccessible to a large chunk of the population—including the elderly, people with temporary, situational and permanent disabilities among others. Though there are government bodies entrusted to formulate guidelines for making certain buildings barrier free, the ground rules are silent on the implementation of accessible design in public spaces and built environments. This study aims to address the need for inclusivity in designing public spaces and proposes an interior design model that can be accessed by diverse individuals and communities.


Introduction

Inclusive design, universal design and design for all are terms used to describe an approach of developing products, services and environments, which are usable and attractive for a large number of people regardless of age, gender, language and ability [1]. The development of products and services that offer universal access is a crucial element in facilitating a genuinely inclusive environment in all public spaces. The UK Design Council describes inclusive design as neither a new genre of design, nor a separate specialism, but as a general approach to designing in which designers ensure


S. Arora
sP+a, Mumbai, India
e-mail: suhaniarora188@gmail.com
A. Deshpande (B)
Symbiosis Institute of Design, Pune, India e-mail: aditi.deshpande@sid.edu.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
A. Chakrabarti et al. (eds.), Design for Tomorrow—Volume 1, Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies 221, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0041-8_12







133
that their products and services address the needs of the widest possible audience, irrespective of age or ability [3]. The design process is optimised for a specific user or group of users with specific needs to ensure that a wider diversity of people can make use of it. The approach to inclusive design recognises the fact that it is not always possible to cater to the demands of the whole population. Nonetheless, the approach to inclusivity maintains that public spaces must be barrier free in order to be accessible to as many people as possible, keeping the extreme users and their needs in mind. The use of the term "inclusive" rather than "universal" reflects the view that "inclusivity" is a more achievable, and in many situations, appropriate goal than "Universal Design" or "Design for All [10]." Kat Holmes, an advocate for equitable design in the tech world, argues that an inclusive designer "is anyone who recognises and remedies mismatched interactions between people and their world [6]." As design principles continue to evolve, designers must look beyond aesthetic and functional designs and include more complex issues like equality and inclusion. This paper highlights the design strategies and principles for barrier-free public spaces in India and lays down an interior design model for a bookstore that can be occupied by senior citizens, people with temporary and permanent physical disabili- ties as well as fully bodied persons. The aim of this paper is to present a methodolog- ical design approach that can be used by students, teachers and industrial designers among others to implement inclusive design in order to create spaces for one and all. A summary of the guidelines for designing for users with different capabilities is given along with a description of the model of a bookstore—a public space that caters to people of all ages and backgrounds yet still remains neglected in terms of accessibility and a practical design approach. The model is an interpretation and implementation of inclusivity in design based on a user-centric approach. It can also
be used as a template for creating accessible public spaces.


Designing for All

As we all prepare to live in a world with ageing ailments and disabilities, we need to prepare our infrastructure, systems and technologies to allow inclusion of human diversity as the guiding philosophy for designers. Census 2011 has revealed that over 26.8 million crore people in India suffer from one or the other kind of disability. Several legal regulations like Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, passed by the Government of India, ratification of the UNCRPD Act, 2007 and the Accessible India Campaign launched by the Hon'ble Prime Minister in 2015 reflect a growth in the process of including and understanding the needs of the differently abled population in the country. More than fifty cities have been undertaken under the Accessible India Campaign to be made accessible with investments on accessible infrastructures for public use, tourism, mobility, etc. However, it remains a fact that India has only a limited number of professionals competent to deliver accessibility solutions in diverse urban situations [14].
By incorporating universal design principles into plans, designers and profes- sionals can create spaces without discrimination, thereby benefitting a wide range of people with varied abilities, preferences and age groups. Designers, companies and government all have a role to play, by designing, investing and legislating with difference in mind, so that a design process that is inclusive becomes a standard practice [13].


Principles of Inclusive Design

Great places are designed for the inclusion and enjoyment of everyone, including those with differing cognitive, sensory, physical or developmental abilities [11]. Considering how elements can be reached, manipulated and used irrespective of body size, posture or mobility is one of the fundamental principles of inclusive design. A number of design approaches exist for users with impairments, irrespective of whether caused by ageing or congenital conditions. The approaches can broadly be defined by the target user groups and how they aim to enable usability. For instance, most inclusive design approaches define the target population as being older users, functionally impaired users or the whole population [8].
The user pyramid Fig. 12.1 shows how users can be divided into four segments. The average, able-bodied consumer is located at the bottom or base of the pyramid. The next and biggest segment consists of people with temporary or situational disabil- ities—pregnant women, people who need glasses, are left handed, or have dyslexia as well as those carrying heavy luggage or infants on stroller. Inclusive design aims to reach the population within these two groups to accommodate them into mainstream

Fig. 12.1 Inclusive design user pyramid presenting a continuum of population diversity (Inclusive Design Toolkit)
products and services in the market. The top two segments are usually not viewed as primary markets for inclusive design, due to the large gap between their needs and the needs of the mainstream user [5].
The UK Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (2006) published five principles for inclusive design in buildings, places and spaces. The principles are as follows:
Inclusive design places people at the heart of the design process.
Inclusive design acknowledges diversity and difference.
Inclusive design offers choice where a single design solution cannot accommo- date all users.
Inclusive design provides for flexibility in use.
Inclusive design provides buildings and environments that are enjoyable to use for everyone.


Guidelines for Barrier-Free Built Environments by Government Bodies

The main objective of the "Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1996 enacted by the Government of India is to create barrier-free environment for persons with disabilities and to make special provisions for the integration of persons with disabilities into the social mainstream. In regard to non-discrimination in the built environment, provisions have been made in this Act for ramps in public buildings, adaptation of toilets for wheel chair users, Braille symbols and auditory signals in elevators [2].
The Central Public Works Department of India recommends adequate space for persons using mobility devices like wheelchairs, crutches and walkers as well as those walking with the assistance of other persons. With regard to the special needs of person with disabilities, the design guidelines for built environments are as follows:
Clear 900 mm width for entry and exit doors.
Compulsory ramp for approach with a minimum slope of 1: 12. Hand rails shall be provided for ramps/slope ways.
Entrance landing shall be provided adjacent to ramp with the minimum dimension 1800 × 2000 mm.
For stepped approach, size of tread shall not be less than 300 mm and maximum
riser shall be 150 mm. Provision of 900 mm high hand rail on both sides of the stepped approach is compulsory.
Switches as well as door handles and other fixtures and fittings should be between 900 and 1200 mm height from the finished floor level.
Locking and opening controls for window and doors should not be more than 1400 mm from the finished floor usable by one hand.
A window should have an unobstructed viewing zone for wheelchair users.


Fig. 12.2 Digital sketches depicting reaches and clear width for wheelchair users


Allow a space at least 350 mm deep and 700 mm high under a counter, stand, etc (Fig. 12.2).
The minimum size of washroom shall be 1500 × 1750 mm with a clear opening of 900 mm for the door swinging outwards.
The above-mentioned guidelines are a working tool to provide a common point of reference as well as a starting point to design spaces for the disabled users. Design professionals, the building industry and the community as a whole must consider these low-cost guidelines and implement them without sacrificing the aesthetics and feel of the space.


Bookstore and Inclusive Design

The bookstore is a space that allows retail activity of books and also promotes interac- tion between people of various backgrounds, culture and age groups. Bookstore is a space that must open its doors to all kinds of people irrespective of their age, disability and needs. In recent years, with the development of the digital publishing technology and online sales platform, physical bookstores that regard traditional printed books face a challenge. However, bookstores provide a more holistic customer experience. Store design, virtual displays and visual merchandising play a huge role in attracting customers and influencing their decision to purchase books in a physical bookstore. Moreover, the elderly population still struggles to cope with technological advance- ments and thus prefers the traditional idea of visiting a bookstore and spending time in a conducive environment. The disabled population too prefers visiting a bookstore as a leisure activity, although they might be assisted by someone. Thus, the book- store must be a platform to engage customers and provide an environment that is favourable to all.
Method

Defining the Target Audience

Inclusive design focuses on choosing a target market for a particular design, and making informed decisions to maximise the usability of the space or product. The definition of inclusivity adopted here also means that inclusive design does not mean designing specifically for people with disabilities—it means considering the needs of able-bodied people as well as people with various levels of capability limitations and designing products and services to meet the needs of all users to the greatest extent possible [12].
For the model of the bookstore, the target audience identified is the elderly popu- lation (people above the age of 65) as well as those with temporary, situational and physical disabilities. Wheelchair-bound persons, people with crutches and others who might be temporarily disabled form the focus group for this particular project. It excludes people with visual impairments and mental disabilities.


User Study

User study is important from the aspect of "knowing the users" and designing inclu- sively for the target audience as well as for able-bodied users. An empathetic approach is important to understand the needs of the users. Empathy is crucial to a human- centred design process such as design thinking and empathy helps design thinkers to set aside his or her own assumptions about the world in order to gain insight into their users and their needs [4].
In order to engage with extreme users (i.e., the elderly and disabled), four old 
 age homes as well as two homes for the disabled were visited in and around Pune. The naturalistic observation method was applied in order to study how the end users interact with products and their surroundings. Researchers using this method of data collection are interested in observing a subject's unaltered behaviour in his normal environment [9]. The insights from the observation pointed the need to consider anthropometric data, keeping in mind reaches and clearances while design for the end users.


Survey

Data collection surveys question a selected sample of individuals to obtain data about their needs, opinions and requirements. It is a standard tool for empirical research that helps in identifying customer preferences. Online questionnaire with multiple choice questions were appointed for the purpose of understanding the needs of customers.
The survey was circulated among 120 adults of various age groups (18–70 years), and the results collected were then analysed to understand consumer propensity.
The results revealed that for most people, the environment and atmosphere of the space are a key factor for opting to visit a bookstore. Moreover, reading spaces within the store enhance customer experience and were selected as the most important aspect in providing a conducive ambience. The survey also brings to light the most preferred and popular genre of books among readers—fiction and novels. This is an important criteria for space allocation within the store for individual categories and their placement within the display arenas.


Task Analysis

One of the most important steps to conduct a meaningful user study is task analysis— a diagram or flow chart explaining the steps taken by a user to complete an activity or a task in the space. Once all the steps are laid out, the designer is in a position to eliminate unnecessary steps, with the objective of minimising the effort required to fulfil a particular activity. The idea is to simply map out the sequence of activities required to achieve a goal. This step is beneficial as it depicts the influence of the physical environment on the users while attempting to meet a goal.
In a bookstore, the goal of the customer is to browse through various genres, using the seating areas to read books and purchasing items after completing payment at the checkout counter. The experience flow of the primary users, i.e., the visitors, is elaborated in Fig. 12.3. The staff and employees form the secondary users in the bookstore. Breaking down the tasks advocates a deeper understanding of the work undertaken by the employees to achieve completion of an activity (see Fig. 12.4. These users occupy the space for a longer duration everyday, thus making this step vital in the design process.


Case Studies

A case study is a research method involving an in-depth study of existing spaces and noting down the observations from the same. Case studies can be used to establish pros and cons in the design of spaces that exist in the market and overcome the limitations to improve the design and customer experience.
Site visits form an integral part of conducting case studies. For the purpose of this project, visiting bookstores and observing the space planning layouts was a crucial step. There were six bookstores visited in Pune, India, including Crossword, Book World, Varada Books, Rasik Sahitya, The Word Book Shop and Pragati Book Centre. The case studies conducted revealed a typical zoning plan followed by book- stores. Most stores attempt to maximise display areas within small spaces to generate


Fig. 12.3 Task flow of customers

Fig. 12.4 Task flow of employees
Table 12.1 Pros and cons of existing bookstore designs
S. No.
Pros
 Cons 
1
Maximising display areas
Towering bookshelves
2
Clear identification of various genres
Insufficient seating
3
Space near checkout counter for waiting
Narrow corridors
4
More than one help desk placed with employees to assist
Heavy furniture that cannot be moved
5
–
Stairs for accessing main door
6
–
Absence of handicap washroom


revenue from the sale of books. The following table Table 12.1 shows the takeaways and observations of the case studies conducted.


Execution

Space Planning

The standalone bookstore has an area of 405 m2. The rectangular plan has a clear entrance and exit and is divided into various zones. The display area is the most important retail zone in the bookstore and occupies about 40% of the total area. The reception and checkout counter is situated on the right-hand side as one enters (see Fig. 12.5 to allow clear exit after purchasing items. A small cafe attracts customers through the window display. People can pick up a book and enjoy a beverage in the cafe area. A central reading space along with multiple reading zones form about 5% of the plan area. Seating provisions have been provided alongside the display sections

Fig. 12.5 Bookstore furniture plan
so as to allow convenience, especially for senior citizens. Information pods—smart and flexible desks that can be used as information points or computer stations—have been placed at regular intervals in the store. The information pods meet accessibility guidelines due to its adjustable height and can be used by customers to navigate within the bookstore. Other ancillary areas, situated at the back end of the store include specially designed washrooms for the disabled, a staff area as well as a store room for storing inventory. Circulation being an essential part of the bookstore utilises 35% of the space. Wide corridors and clearance along display sections are a key requirement for ease of movement and a smooth customer flow. Thus, the bookstore is designed to have enough room and is built to accommodate users with varying needs.


Design Solutions

One of the most important characteristics of the design process during the conceptual phase is that it is creative, innovative and unpredictable as an activity [15]. The design process allows one to go back to each problem and create practical solutions.
For instance, to solve the existing design problems mentioned in Table 12.1, multiple reading spots have been placed to minimise travel time and distance, thereby reducing the effort put in by customers. Lightweight and movable furniture has been designed along with placement of ottomans near display racks. These stools can be carried and placed wherever required. The wall-mounted shelves are designed to maximise display while keeping the reaches and heights at an accessible level for wheelchair users (Figs. 12.6 and 12.7). Thus, two-way shelves have been employed,

Fig. 12.6 Sectional elevations


Fig. 12.7 Wall-mounted shelves along with reading space


and the distance between consecutive shelves is wide enough for two wheelchairs to pass simultaneously with ease.


Selection of Materials and Finishes

In order to provide traction to easily manoeuvre wheelchairs, linoleum flooring has 
 been employed. The linoleum acoustic tiles also reduce impact sound by 14 dB and 
 have a cushion underfoot that helps in avoiding echo. Ceramic tiles have been opted 
 for the service areas and washrooms as they are durable and slip resistant. For the 
 construction of the shelving units and display fixtures, plywood with a laminate 
 covering provides an ideal and budget friendly solution (Fig. 12.8).

Inclusivity Within the bookstore
The foremost benefit of inclusive design is to welcome everyone to encourage harmo- nious relations between social groups. In order to create a barrier-free space for the physically disabled and elderly, certain guidelines have been enforced to ameliorate the environment. For instance, an 1800 mm wide ramp leads to an entrance landing to allow obstruction free entry. An automatic sliding door is employed to bring the customers in to the space. The door is clearly distinguished from the glass facade with the help of 75 mm wide high-contrast strips running on all corners of the door. All corridors are 900 mm wide with a turning radius of 1500 mm.
 Signages placed throughout the store permit easy navigation and identification of zones as well as genres. Suspended signs at 2000 mm height with a legible font 
 (Helvetica) and size provide clear cut description of the shelving units. In order to


Fig. 12.8 Central display and checkout


make way finding easy for visitors, floor decals and vinyl strips have been colour 
 coded to guide the users to specific areas (see Fig. 12.9. The inclusive design princi- ples meet all accessibility requirements without compromising on the look and feel of the store. The colour scheme of the interiors has a neutral backdrop and flooring 
 surface with pops of colours to highlight certain spaces such as wall mounted shelves and signage boards. The use of multiple colours not only depicts diversity but also serves a functional purpose of colour coding genres and floor strips (Fig. 12.10).

Fig. 12.9 Floor decals to guide customers


Fig. 12.10 Front view of the store

Conclusion

As a final note, this paper shows a level of inclusion that can be practised and exercised through the application of a methodical user-centred approach. The guide- lines can be used to design any barrier-free public space, and the model provides a template highlighting a practical approach to design accessible spaces. Even though accessibility has improved over the last decade, and planning policy has shifted with investment providing new facilities to once-excluded communities, the fact remains that disadvantaged people are far more likely to live in poor quality environments [7]. Inclusion in design is an important step to build a future with equality. Thus, designers must help create places that work for everyone. The principles of inclu- sive design outlined in this paper help professionals think about subtle yet essential touches that can make a space functional and comfortable without sacrificing the aesthetic value.
Acknowledgements We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Ms. Sanjeevani Ayachit, Dy. Director and Prof. Prasanna Halbe, H.O.D., Industrial Design Department of Symbiosis Institute of Design, Pune, for their constant support and guidance. Special thanks to Prof. Tushar Amin and Dr. Tanmayee Puntambekar, for their kind cooperation to the completion of this project and research paper.



References

Bechmann, S.: Inclusive Design: A Perfect Solution?
Central Public Works Department Publishings.: https://cpwd.gov.in/Publication/aged&disabl ed.PDF. Accessed 8th Oct 2020 (1998)
Clarkson, P.J., Coleman, R.: History of Inclusive Design (2013)
Dam, R.F., Siang, T.Y.: Design thinking: getting started with empathy. In: Interaction Design Foundation, https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/design-thinking-get ting-started-with-empathy. Accessed 1st Oct 2020 (2020)
Eikhaug, O., Gheerawo, R., et al.: Innovating with People—The Business of Inclusive Design (2010)
Fletcher, H.: The principles of inclusive design. In: Design Council UK Publica- tions, https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/sites/default/files/asset/document/the-principles-of- inclusive-design.pdf. Accessed 11th Oct 2020 (2006)
Inclusive By Design.: In: Design Council UK Publications. https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/ sites/default/files/asset/document/inclusion-by-design.pdf. Accessed 12th June 2020 (2008)
Keates, S., Clarkson, P.J., et al.: Towards A Practical Design Approach (2000)
Naturalistic Observation in Psychology.: Definition and Examples, https://study.com/academy/ lesson/naturalistic-observation-in-psychology-definition-examples.html. Accessed 11th Oct 2020 (2015)
Newell, A.F., Gregor, P., et al.: User-Sensitive Inclusive Design (2011)
Peinhardt, K., Storring, N. Inclusive by design: laying a foundation for diversity in public space. In: Project for Public Spaces. https://www.pps.org/article/inclusive-by-design-laying-a- foundation-for-diversity-in-public-space. Accessed 12th June 2020 (2019)
Prasad, U., Clarkson, P.J.: Characterising Users for Inclusive Design—Three Requirements (2005)
The Benefit of Designing for Everyone.: In: Centre for Inclusive Design. PwC Australia, https://centreforinclusivedesign.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/inclusive-des ign-report-digital-160519.pdf. Accessed 1st June 2020 (2019)
Universal Design and Accessibility Planning.: Global Initiative of Academic Networks, https:// www.iitr.ac.in/Main/uploads/File/2018/gian12012018.pdf. Accessed 10th June 2020 (2018)
Yilmaz, S., Seifert, C.M.: Cognitive Heuristics in Design Ideation (2010)