Development of a Tool for Auditing Accessibility of Public Infrastructure and Points of Interest in Urban Areas


Yiannis Tsampoulatidis Department of Supply Chain Management
International Hellenic University Katerini, Greece tsampoulatidis@gmail.com

Alexandros Mourouzis Department of Supply Chain Management
International Hellenic University Katerini, Greece mourouzi@gmail.com
Charisios Achillas Department of Supply Chain Management
International Hellenic University Katerini, Greece c.achillas@ihu.edu.gr

Kyriakos Koritsoglou Department of Informatics & Telecommunications University of Ioannina Ioannina, Greece kkoritsoglou@uoi.com
Dimitrios Aidonis Department of Supply Chain Management
International Hellenic University Katerini, Greece daidonis@ihu.gr

Abstract—Lately, the term accessibility attracts more attention globally in policy, but also in scientific and business terms. This is mainly triggered by two key reasons. The first one is its importance for the social performance of communities. Public are becoming more sensitive in social issues lately, and accessibility is considered a cornerstone towards this direction. Moreover, accessibility becomes essential towards sustainable development, due to its business importance. Efficiently handling accessibility issues and accommodating the special needs of people with disabilities may provide a robust business environment and substantial exploit market opportunities. To that end, the need for accessibility, especially in urban environments, is vital and ICT can play a key role towards enhancing accessibility. There are several tools and applications already available to serve this goal. This work presents a novel tool, namely the Seek & Go application, which is a holistic aid application for disabled people with features of a GPS navigation system, especially designed for pedestrians with mobility problems and special accessibility requirements. The paper briefly discusses the key technical aspects, while also presents user experience insights and description of the models and document schemas that have been selected for its development.
Keywords—component, accessibility audit, disabilities, urban environment
Introduction
Citizens within a society, regardless of whether they have full functional or mental abilities, often face numerous obstacles and difficulties in respect to communication, information, mobility or other factors that make it difficult to understand messages or instructions [1]. As a direct consequence, accessibility difficulties of various types can lead to the marginalization or even to the social exclusion of individuals with special needs [2].
As a term, accessibility describes the characteristics of the environment which allow all citizens without discrimination of age, gender or other special characteristics, to be able to independently, comfortably and safely use and access the service infrastructures and goods that are offered by the wider social environment [3]. It should be highlighted that with the term infrastructure, we refer to the various conventional, but also electronic installations.
Accessibility is thus a horizontal concept, the provision of which affects almost all areas of everyday life for people. Indicatively, such areas can be public infrastructure, public space, means of transport, means of communication, signage, services and goods [4]. Overall, accessibility refers to the provision of constructions and spaces that are specially designed and managed in such a way, so that those are safe, comfortable and can be used by all members of society [5]. The term also states that all structures and facilities should be accessible so that they can be actually used, ensuring autonomy of movement for the individual.
Access is a fundamental element of structured environments, the provision of which allows citizens to use buildings, facilities and public space without exclusion [3]. Within an urban environment, it is important that access ensures the participation of the individual in any social and economic activity [5]. By ensuring that all people, with or without any form of disability, have the same and equal opportunities to move and access built-in environments, the goal of full public participation can be achieved, and the society can be characterized by social inclusion for all. One important aspect of accessibility is the approachability of the individual [4], which is interrelated with the individual's participation in society and inextricably linked to the human right to make his or her choices, without the existence of obstacles, exclusions and discrimination [6].
Internationally, it is more than three decades that communities around the globe have recognized the importance and significance of accessibility for all. In this light, most organized communities have introduced provisions, standards, and special rules on accessibility. The latter has been recognized lately as an important element towards sustainable development, as it improves the quality of life of individuals and also makes urban environments more habitable [7]. Society's failure and inability to effectively address barriers to accessibility is inextricably linked to shortcomings and misguided urban planning strategies [3], while widening the gap and inequality of people with disabilities in comparison to other citizens.



979-8-3503-9858-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
The Need for Accessiblity in Urban Environments
Accessibility requirements
The urban environment where individuals live has a significant influence on the experience and the extent of the disability [8]. Inaccessible environments and spaces further intensify the problem of disability for those people, as they create barriers that prevent their participation and integration within the society, in respect to innumerable social, professional, political and cultural events [9]. For instance, hard-of-hearing individuals who visit a cultural organization (e.g., a museum) where no interpreting service is available, experience inability to participate and lead to alienation or exclusion. The same applies to individuals in wheelchairs who need to move in public buildings without accessible elevators or ramps, or to blind people who need to get signage information in a hospital or safety instructions written on a leaflet in an airplane, but no braille code is available.
In order for the environment to be characterized as accessible, it needs to take into account the special needs of all different categories of people with disabilities and special needs, in a way that it can ensure their autonomous movement, equal access and overall quality of life [10]. In this light, none one-fits-all solution is available and different needs should be accommodated.
Main obstacles in the urban environment
On the whole, people with mobility disabilities face obstacles and difficulties that are inextricably linked to the various physical, technological and architectural elements of the built environment [9]. For instance, the entrance –or 
 internal doors– of a building may be not wide enough for a 
 wheelchair to cross, or toilets may be considerably small, not 
 allowing wheelchairs' movement and making buildings 
 inaccessible for those people. Moreover, elevators may not be 
 of an adequate size, buttons can be positioned too high, while 
 there may be no or limited maneuverability and movement. 
 Also, the surrounding area may be slippery as the floor may 
 be wet or polished, while in the outer space signage can be 
 limited, parked vehicles may block the way, chairs from the 
 cafes may deteriorate the movement on the sidewalks, etc. In this sense, there are numerous different obstacles for people with disabilities and special needs that significantly contribute to reducing the accessibility of individuals.
Such individuals with disabilities and special needs usually require large and level surfaces or surfaces that have 
 small slopes, while the floors should be continuous and made 
 of non-slip materials [10]. Ramps are required, together with 
 accessible elevators, ladders with handles on both sides, 
 marking on the edges of stair steps, to name a few. Moreover, 
 mechanisms and equipment in toilets and bathrooms should 
 be at the appropriate height and need to be easily handled, 
 while markings should be at the eye level, so as to limit the possibility of inability to easily and directly locate them [11].
People with visual impairments rely primarily on the perception of auditory and tactile stimuli, while experiencing significant difficulties in informing, communicating, and efficiently using various equipment, devices, and aids [12]. Conventional printed forms of communication or visual signage, such as price lists, timetables, etc., when not printed in adequately large fonts, strong background color contrasts or 
 forms that are in braille, critically limit their accessibility for the individual.
In most cases, disabled people usually need the support of specialized and well-trained staff for accommodation of their needs. In addition, corridors in buildings are required to have 
 smooth surfaces and sufficient crossing width, while the 
 boundaries of the corridors should be distinct and easily 
 recognized by the individual, regardless of the type of 
 disability. It is essential spaces to be signaged in braille or 
 tactile structures, spaces should have strong color contrasts 
of the 
 environment should be characterized by simplicity and clarity [13].
On the contrary, people with hearing problems rely mainly on the perception of visual stimuli, while experience significant difficulties with information when this relies only on audio systems, without the provision of additional visual information (e.g., lack of interpretation in Braille code, inexistence of sound amplification systems, etc.). To satisfy their special needs, such people require spaces with good 
 acoustics [14]. Sound aids and special equipment through which alternative methods of communication can be provided are also very accommodating for their day-to-day activities.
In general, people with reduced mobility capabilities face obstacles in various aspects of their everyday life, such as obstacles in the field of health, information and communication, education, employment, culture, leisure, access to services, transportation, to name a few. According to literature, people with disabilities, even today, face and experience obstacles especially in the field of infrastructure, which are associated with deficiencies and weaknesses in elements such as buildings, indoor-outdoor spaces, equipment and service systems, both in rural and urban areas [11].
Poor design of public infrastructure, such as for example
 lack of accessible sanitary facilities, lack of traffic 
 demarcation systems, lack of emergency escape 
 infrastructure, ramps with a step at the end, blind guides, 
 phones and other equipment placed at a wrong height or with 
 inaccessible user manuals, are dominant elements that prevent the free access for all.
Of course, all the aforementioned obstacles are only indicative. In the real world, within the built urban environment, there are numerous more such impediments, hurdles and barriers existing that harden the everyday life for people with disabilities and special needs. Actually, the hardest problem for urban and spatial planning developers in most cases is that many obstacles are not always obvious and sometimes require deep knowledge of accessibility issues by the planner in order to be recognized and accommodated.
In this context, there is a strong need for tailored tools and effective, well-organized guidance to support planners in designing for all, especially in the case of auditing tools. To that end, ICT tools and technologies can play a critical role. In the paragraphs to follow, an innovative tool for auditing accessibility of public infrastructure and points of interest in urban areas is presented and demonstrated.
Development of Tool for Auditing accessibility
To support people with disabilities and special needs, a large number of smartphone applications that focus on accessibility issues have been developed during the past years. To name a few, Voice4u, Proloquo2Go, Petralex, Dragon Dictation, JABtalk, Be My Eyes, NotNav, Wheelmap, Wheelmate, Access Now are indicatively discussed in the material to follow.
Voice4u provides a text-to-speech application with natural sounding voices in more than thirty languages and gender options. With the use of the app, the user may speak by typing and photographing with camera. It has more than 180 icons stored and can create images, record voice and print image cards [15]. Proloquo2Go is an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) app developed to provide a daily communication tool and to build language skills. The application aims to improve daily communication for people with speaking difficulties. Users communicate by pressing icons from the embodied word library of the application (more than 10,000 icons). The app has customizable vocabulary levels and even provides a progressive language feature that can assist people to expand their vocabulary [16]. Petralex is a hearing aid application. Among other functionalities, the app offers an audiogram at home within a few minutes, automatic conversion of the recorded speech into text, full acoustic amplification up to 30 dB with a wired headset, as well as a regulated amplification of quiet sounds with preservation of the general volume level [17]. Dragon Dictation: Without a deep knowledge of lip or signage language, communication with people with hearing problems is difficult, or sometimes impossible. One solution to this problem is the visual text, or else the speech text. Dragon Dictation is an all-in-one speech to text mobile application that is accurate and simple to use. The application aims to save valuable time from having to type large sentences on a tiny smartphone keyboard [18]. JABtalk is an application that has been designed to assist non- verbal people to communicate. The application was initially developed for children, but it is now also offered for adults,
e.g. stroke patients, toddlers, speech-language pathologists, and others. JABtalk combines personalized voice and images with a simple user interface in order to provide an easy-to-use and an easy-to-learn speech solution [19].
Similarly, several applications have developed for blind people. If a blind person finds himself/herself in an unknown environment, it will be very difficult to find his/her way. This is exactly the problem that Be My Eyes is focusing on. Be My Eyes aims to assist blind and visually impaired people to recognize objects and cope with everyday situations. Be My Eyes "exploits" an online community of sighted volunteers who support users via a live video chat, receiving photos or videos from the user [20]. NotNav is another orientation aid application, designed for the blind and visually impaired. The app was actually developed by the blind, as a GPS system that informs the user on the nearest street address and direction, including routes, crossroads, Points of Interest and other user- defined waypoints and functions. NotNav also includes turn- by-turn instructions in order to accommodate the user's navigation [21].
There are also applications developed to assist wheelchair users. Availability in accessibility infrastructure is critical for wheelchair users. In this light, it is imperative for these people to know in advance which places are accessible and to what extent. Wheelmap is an app that assesses public places such as
bars, restaurants, and cinemas for accessibility infrastructure [22], while Wheelmate is great for locating wheelchair accessible bathrooms and car parks [23]. Access Now is an application developed to detect on an interactive map, accessible locations in the proximity of the user. People with disabilities can browse points of interest such as restaurants, museums and attractions and view accessibility assessments. Locations are characterized as accessible, partially accessible, patio access only and inaccessible [24].
As already discussed, the aforementioned applications are only indicative of the numerous applications that have been developed in order to support people with special needs over the last years. The list is constantly increasing, since accessibility becomes a hot issue for smart cities and a large market is being developed. To that end, the Seek & Go application, that is under development in the framework of the "Digital Products and Services for Accessible and Safe Mobility of Senior and Disabled Tourists and Citizens in Greece" project (acronym: Seek & Go), presents a holistic aid application for disabled people. The project is funded by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the "Research – Create – Innovate" call and is implemented under the collaboration of; (a) MLS Multimedia S.A., a software company located in Thessaloniki, Greece, (b) the University of Ioannina – Department of Informatics & Telecommunications and (c) the International Hellenic University – Department of Supply Chain Management. It should be highlighted that the consortium works in close collaboration with the National Confederation of Disabled People, an umbrella organization representing the disability and chronic diseases' patient's movement in Greece, so as to better understand the special needs and requirements of the people with disabilities.
Based on the multi-disciplinary specialization and long experience of the Seek & Go partnership, the project aims towards the development of innovative solutions for private and public entities, so as them to improve their capacity to approach and serve in more effective and competitive ways, individuals with special needs. More specifically, the project focuses on satisfying the special needs of people with disabilities or people with limited mobility at large, including senior people, pregnant women, etc.
A key result of the project is a novel application, with features of a GPS navigation system, especially designed for pedestrians with disabilities and special accessibility requirements. The Seek & Go application targets wheelchair users and other types of people with reduced mobility, conforming with the "Design for All" principles and the widely accepted accessibility standards. One of the main aspects of the project is to collect georeferenced accessibility data that will cover most of the main urban networks of the two largest urban conurbations in Greece, namely the Greater Areas of Athens and Thessaloniki. However, the project consortium also targets to form the ground that will allow -in the post-project period- to eventually reach a 100% coverage at national level in Greece.
Expert evaluators and consultants, through detailed on- the-spot inspections, assess streets and points of interest within the study area. In this way, when finished, the application is expected to act catalytically towards improving the mobility of citizens with disabilities in Greece, but also
towards enhance the country's branding at global level, acknowledging Greece as a unique accessible destination. Obviously, the auding procedure is critical for the efficient and smooth operation of the application. To that end, the development of the Seek & Go application is also accompanied by the implementation of a specialized auditing tool which has been specially designed to support this initiative. In the following paragraphs, the auditing tool's technical aspects and architecture are presented, together with user experience insights and description of the models and document schemas that have been selected for its development.
Technical Arppoach
Conceptual Architecture
The Seek & Go application follows the microservices design approach and is composed of three loosely coupled layers. This approach allows independent deployment and distinct scalability with fewer dependencies, among each layer, that leads to easier maintenance and faster updates, clearer communication interface and faster failure recovery. The overall application is implemented as a Progressive Web App (WPA) using Service Workers as the virtual proxy between the browser and the network since supporting offline use was a major requirement due to the nature of app, which is mainly for being used on the move. More specifically, the layers of the Seek & Go conceptual architecture are depicted in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Seek and Go conceptual architecture.

In more detail, the front-end layer is composed of; (i) the User Interface (UI), (ii) the Application Programming Interface (API) client for fetching data from the server and the local storage, and (iii) the survey dispatcher, which handles data synchronisation among the local storage and the remote database. This layer is based on React, a JavaScript library for building user interfaces, Google Maps JavaScript API, Turf, an advanced geospatial analysis library, Chakra-UI, a simple, modular and accessible component library that provides accessible building blocks to build React applications, and Survey.js, a set of open-source JavaScript libraries to dynamically build surveys and forms.
The back-end layer, a server-side application that handles the business logic including user management, authentication, handling of privileges and rights, database communication, and defining API endpoints, following the Open API 3.0 specification for describing, producing, consuming, and visualising RESTful web services. The underlying technologies of this layer are; the Node.js, a JavaScript runtime, Feathers.js, a framework for real-time applications and REST APIs, and the Survey Creator, part of the Survey.js,
for composing the various questionnaires that are linked to graphical entities (e.g., obstacles, pavements, crosswalks, points of interest, and others) on the map, accordingly.
Finally, the persistent storage layer, which is based on MongoDB, a cross-platform document-oriented database, classified as a NoSQL DB. Every data produced in the Seek & Go application are JSON documents with the appropriate schemas which in particular are validated by the Mongoose object model library in the back end. The implementation of this layer is based on MongoDB Atlas Clusters hosted in Amazon Web Services, that provides maximum scalability and expandability, and zero downtime service by using automated DB replicas.
Handing offline content
The Seek & Go application is designed and implemented to be used concurrently by multiple users who install the application on their tablet or smartphone with adequate screen size and also by taking into account possible unstable internet connection e.g., when users entering underground parking lots, buildings, elevators, etc. In these terms, the application should be functional even without internet access. To achieve this, the app is implemented as a PWA, using smart caching and browser's local storage for persisting the collected data. Moreover, a mechanism for constantly monitoring content updates is also introduced to ensure that local data are being in sync with the main database.
The users are aware if their collected data are not in sync and when network connection becomes available, they are able to send data to the server either as a batch selection or per survey on demand. As the application allows taking and storing photos, handling them locally and offline, required special handling. Photos are encoded to Base64 sequence, on the fly, so as to comply to the local storage limitations. When photos are being pushed to the server though, they are decoded to their original binary form and stored as image files in JPG format. This transformation also helps reducing the actual size in bytes in the server. Public links of the uploaded image also become available in various resolutions (thumbnail, medium, original).
One drawback of this approach though, is the lack to support flawlessly the significantly high-resolution images which are produced by modern mobile cameras, even though this limitation is mainly device-depended. To overcome the issue of handling very large photos without memory errors, especially on low-end devices, users can either select a lower resolution on their camera settings or they need to synchronise more often and then empty the local storage of their devices after each synchronisation. Deleting local storage is possible via the front-end UI to privileged users only as an extra layer of protection against accidental data loss and targets the most experienced users.
User Experience
One of the main difficulties when filling questionnaires related to geolocation details, is to align the questions with self-explanatory entities on the map for easier identification. For traditional paper-based surveys this is a burdensome, if not impossible task. For electronic surveys, where maps are available, the geolocation is usually limited to a single spot (latitude / longitude coordinates) marked by a pin or at the best by a polygon that bounds an area on the map. In the Seek &
Go application though, an innovative approach that enhances and improves the user experience is introduced
Users are guided to first select the appropriate entity among; (a) street segments, (b) points of interests (POIs), (c) 
 segment connections, and (d) POIs / entrances connections. Each selection of these entities displays simplified steps on the screen that guide users to literally draw the area of interest by tapping on the map. The app, restricts the movement of the drawing elements by applying simple trigonometric calculations (using the Turf library), thus improving the user experience, especially when finger's tapping is used for interacting with the UI from a touch screen. Depending on the selected entity, the UI is adapted to display related simplified information and extra rules are applied accordingly to restrict undesired actions from the users, such as limiting adding a pedestrian crossing if no two opposite pavements are defined in the working segment. Fig. 2 depicts an indicative screenshot of the application when a segment entity is selected, and its list of corresponding surveys are for users to know which questionnaires are left unanswered.

Fig. 2. Screenshot of the application highlighting a selected segment with its corresponding list of surveys remained to be filled, marked in red.

Each single entity on the map, corresponds to the appropriate survey which contains related questions, oriented to accessibility details. In this context, specially designed questionnaires have been designed for each one of the four aforementioned entities (street segments, POIs, segment connections, and POIs' entrances), in order to record all the necessary accessibility-related information (e.g., detailed information about obstacles or ramps in pavements, pedestrian crossings, accessibility infrastructure in buildings, slope angles, opening widths, special signaling for the visually impaired, etc.) (Fig. 2). From the UI's perspective, selecting a survey highlights the corresponding element on the map and vice versa, emphasizing this way their relation. Moreover, in the surveys per se, there are rules that are applied dynamically based on user's answers (e.g., when a wheelchair ramp is available, extra questions concerning the ramp are added, and so on). To further enhance the experience, users are able to directly insert to specific questions, photos from the camera or their photos library, thus avoid switching between screens. The survey contains an overview of the map highlighting the selected entity, so as to assist users to reference at any time the concerned element among segments, pedestrian roads, crossings, pavements, obstacles, entrances, and POIs.
Another aspect of the application, is the interconnection of the various entities, as shown in Fig. 3. This is required in order to form a graph to be used for calculating alternative accessible routes from point X to point Y on a map. Users, can define multiple entrances to POIs and connect different
segments by pavement or pedestrian road via the UI in a very friendly and intuitive manner, using icons and graphical aids. This way, alternative paths can be calculated using a nearby pedestrian crossing when an obstacle lies on one side of the road blocking the entrance of a POI to wheelchair users, for example.

Fig. 3. Tap-friendly UI interaction for connecting segments using self- explanatory icons (sockets and plugs). POI containing two entrances connected to different segments and pedestrian crossing connecting two opposite pavements are also displayed graphically on the screenshot.

The application itself does not provide routing calculations but offers its data, through its API, to third-party systems that can use the collected information for suggesting alternative accessible routes and come up with the optimal one, based on user's specific needs and priorities, or other preferences.
Models and document schemas
The application handles two major types of models, both of them are JSON driven. The first one handles the survey schemas which are produced using the Survey Creator, which is a visual designer that allows experts to create surveys and forms. The designer produces a survey configuration in the JSON format, and this configuration can be later used by the SurveyJS library to display the survey inside the application. The Survey Creator itself cannot be integrated inside the Seek & Go App, but its outcomes (JSON configurations) can be used with the open source SurveyJS library, free of charge. Currently the application supports eighteen different types of surveys, ranging from restrooms, staircases and bus-stops to obstacles, pedestrian crossings and pavements. In total, there are more than four hundred questions defined for the various survey types. Each of the JSON configuration is rendered into a modern form which also supports rules, based on user answers. An indicative survey is depicted in Fig. 4

Fig. 4. Every survey is the rendered output of a JSON configuration which is produced by the Survey Creator.
The second model concerns all schemas defined to support the business logic of the application. There are seven MongoDB collections, namely; (i) the Connections which stores documents describing the relations among different map elements, forming eventually a linked graph, (ii) the Entrances, which stores data about the entrances of POIs, (iii) the POIs which handles several different types like museums, churches etc., (iv) the Segments which is the backbone collection and includes the necessary nested configurations for obstacles, pedestrian crossings, etc., (v) the Surveys, where all answers of the filled surveys are stored, (vi) the Templates which stores the configuration documents from the Survey Creator, and (vii) the Users collection which contains documents about the users of the system (credentials, privileges, etc.).
Conclusion
The paper presents the Seek & Go application, an auditing tool that has been developed in the effort to systematically collect georeferenced accessibility data for streets and points of interest in urban conurbations. The tool is developed in order to feed the developed database with accessibility data, which is used in order to navigate and inform users with special needs, improving in this way the mobility of citizens with disabilities within the study areas.
Acknowledgement
This work has been co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund of the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call Research – Create – Innovate (project acronym: Seek & Go; project code: T1EDK-00108).
Disability, vol. 8, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, pp. 55- 70, 2014.
A. Ward, P.M.A. Baker, and N.W. Moon, "Ensuring the Enfranchisement of People With Disabilities", Journal of Disability Policy Studies, vo,. 20(2), pp. 79–92, 2009.
T. Shakespeare, and N. Watson, "The social model of disability: an outdated ideology?", In S. Barnartt & B. Altman (Eds.), Exploring theories and expanding methodologies: Where we are and where we need to go, pp. 9-28, London: Oxford, 2001.
F. Stroman Duane, "The disability rights movement: from deinstitutionalization to self-determination", Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 2003
Voice4u official website, URL: https://voice4uaac.com, last accessed: 27.06.2022.
Proloquo2Go official website, URL: https://www.assistiveware.com/ products/proloquo2go, last accessed: 27.06.2022.
Petralex official website, URL: https://petralex.pro/en, last accessed: 27.06.2022.
Dragon Dictation official website, URL: https://www.nuance.com/ dragon.html, last accessed: 27.06.2022.
JABtalk official website, URL: https://jabtalk.soft112.com, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
Be my eyes official website, URL: https://www.bemyeyes.com, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
NotNav official website, URL: https://notnav-gps- accessibility.soft112. com, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
Wheelmap official website, URL: https://wheelmap.org, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
Wheelmate official website, URL: https://apps.apple.com/us/app/ wheelmate/id515277627, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
Access Now official website, URL: https://accessnow.com, last accessed: 28.06.2022.
References
R. Atkinson, and S. Davoudi, "The concept of social exclusion in the European Union: Context, Development and Possibilities", Journal of Common Market Studies, vol. 38(3), pp. 427-448, 2000.
J.L. Bezyak, S.A. Sabella, and R.H. Gattis, "Public Transportation: An Investigation of Barriers for People With Disabilities", Journal of Disability Policy Studies, vol. 28(1), pp. 52–60, 2017.
L. Castell, "Building access for the intellectually disabled", Facilities,
vol. 26(3/4), pp. 117-130, 2008.
Y. Crozet, "The Three Stages of Accessibility: The Coming Challenge of Urban Mobility", Mackett, R.L., May, A.D., Kii, M. and Pan, H. (Ed.), Sustainable Transport for Chinese Cities, Transport and Sustainability, vol. 3, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, pp. 79-97, 2012.
N.V. Duarte, D. Oviedo, and A.M.A. Pinto, "Urban Mobility and Social Equity: An Introduction", Oviedo, D., Duarte, N.V. and Pinto,
A.M.A. (Ed.), Urban Mobility and Social Equity in Latin America: Evidence, Concepts, Methods, Transport and Sustainability, vol. 12, Emerald Publishing Limited, Bingley, pp. 1-10, 2020.
G. Dewsbury, K. Clarke, D. Randall, M. Rouncefield, and I. Sommerville, "The anti-social model of disability", Disability and Society, vol. 19, pp. 145-58, 2004.
N. Dubost, "Disability and consumption: A state of the art", Recherche
et Applications En Marketing, vol. 33(2), pp. 75–92, 2018.
G.C. Pal, "Disability, Intersectionality and Deprivation: An Excluded Agenda", Psychology and Developing Societies, vol. 23(2), pp. 159– 176, 2011.
M. Priestley, "Disability: a life course approach", Cambridge: Polity
Press, 2003.
N. Schuller, "Disabled people, crime and social inclusion", Safer
Communities, vol. 4(3), pp. 4-13, 2005.
T. Seekins, N. Arnold, and C. Ipsen, "Assessing and Comparing the Accessibility of Community Environments: A Feasibility Study", Environmental Contexts and Disability, Research in Social Science and