Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology






ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/iidt20

Lived experiences of people with mobility-related disability using assistive devices
Neelam Borade, Aboli Ingle & Aarti Nagarkar

To cite this article: Neelam Borade, Aboli Ingle & Aarti Nagarkar (2021) Lived experiences of people with mobility-related disability using assistive devices, Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 16:7, 730-734, DOI: 10.1080/17483107.2019.1701105
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2019.1701105



 Published online: 13 Dec 2019.

 Submit your article to this journal 

 Article views: 642
 View related articles View Crossmark data

 Citing articles: 9 View citing articles 















Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iidt20
DISABILITY AND REHABILITATION: ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY 2021, VOL. 16, NO. 7, 730–734
https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2019.1701105

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Lived experiences of people with mobility-related disability using assistive devices
Neelam Borade, Aboli Ingle and Aarti Nagarkar
Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, India


ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 11 September 2019
Accepted 2 December 2019
KEYWORDS
Mobility-related disability; India; assistive devices; thematic analysis; lived experiences



















Introduction
Disability is an important public health and development issue. Person with disability are one of the marginalized groups [1]. Studies conducted elsewhere describe the way in which people experience disability. People with disabilities (PWDs) are likely to have poorer health, less education, less economic opportunity, and are more likely to live with greater inequalities than their peers without disabilities [2,3]. Providing rehabilitation services like ADs to individuals with disabilities enable development and reduce exclusion. It also helps to monitor, relieve or neutralize the disability and thus add to the quality of life [4,5]. According to WHO, 1 billion people globally need at least one assistive product but out of this total population only 10% has access to it due to its high price, lack of awareness and a shortage of trained staff (WHO 2019) [6]. In low-middle income countries (LMICs), accessi- bility, availability, and utilization of rehabilitation services and its cost-effectiveness are the major hurdles for PWDs [7]. LMICs have very limited capacity to meet demand for the rehabilitation serv- ices. There are less than 10 skilled rehabilitation practitioners per 1 million population in LMIC. Only, 5–15% of PWDs in LMICs have
received ADs actually [8]. The sparse literature highlights the chal- lenges faced by PWDs in their day to day activities and use of rehabilitative services especially assistive devices in India. Except anecdotal evidence, very less is known about the lived experien- ces of PWDs using assistive devices. The purpose of this study was to understand the user's perspective and challenges in use of ADs. Therefore, the objective of this study is to gain insight into the lived experiences of people using assistive devices with spe- cific reference to mobility related disability in India.

Method
Study setting and sample selection
The study was conducted in an urban area of Pune city located in the western part of the country and is close to the metropolitan city of Mumbai, India. The study was conducted during September 2018 to March 2019. Despite an urban agglomeration with 4 million population, Pune civic bodies lack systematic docu- mentation on physically disabled individuals using any AD. A few voluntary organizations and philanthropist organizations distribute


CONTACT Aarti Nagarkar aarati@unipune.ac.in Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
LIVED EXPERIENCES OF USE OF ASSISTIVE DEVICES 731

ADs to PWDs; hence, they keep a record of their beneficiaries/ users. One such Charitable Trust shared information only after tak- ing oral consent from the users. Researchers collected 14 inter- views in such a manner. Snowball technique was used to include a greater number of respondents. Finally, 25 respondents using ADs participated and completed the interviews. The inclusion cri- teria were (1) at least 18 years of age (2) with a mobility-related disability and (3) using AD/s for at least one year.

Data collection approach
A qualitative research method using a narrative approach was used to study the impact of an AD on life of a physically disabled individual and understand their disability experiences in a given socio-cultural context. This approach helps to understand the life experiences from both inside and outside of an inquiry as well, to imagine the future possibilities of these lives. Furthermore, narra- tive inquiry is potentially valuable and useful for disability research. The narrative enquiry helps to understand the correl- ation between the stories which are not in a chronological sequence and helps to make sense of these stories for better understanding of the context [9].

Data collection tool
The interview guide was prepared to find out the respondents' experiences related to the use of ADs. The interview guide included several questions which were (i) personal characteristics;
(ii) information about ADs: Respondents were asked current use of AD and its duration and also about the problems to access it;
(iii) change in life due to AD: Respondents were asked about the positive and negative experiences associated with AD in day to day activities. Accessibility, affordability, and availability of the services and its impact on the life of PWDs, were also asked.

Data collection and analysis
Interviews were conducted with a narrative approach. The inter- action was at the respondents' residence or at a place suggested by the respondents and in their first language. Responses were recorded on a recorder. Each interview lasted for about 45 min to 1 h. The analysis was carried out throughout the research process. First, the audio recordings were transcribed by two researchers. Initially possible codes were generated. The codes with similar content sorted into a category. The researcher surveyed the cate- gories and group together under the headings to minimize the numbers of categories. The categories related to each other lead to sub themes and themes based on the similarities and differen- ces in content .The relationships of the themes with each other were also checked through thematic mapping. The analysis helped to distribute data into four major themes and 23 sub- themes as described in Table 1.

Study context and ethical approval
The study obtained approval from the ethics committee of the University where the researchers are working. Informed consent was obtained from each respondent and the confidentiality of the transcripts and personal information of the respondents was assured and maintained. Respondents were informed that they could withdraw anytime during an interview without fear of los- ing their entitlements.

Table 1. Overview of themes and subthemes derived from the analysis of interview.

Themes Subthemes

Access to assistive devices Health care providers apathy and lack of
understanding of needs
Procedural delay and limited access to subsidised services
Financial difficulties
Lack of awareness Life with assistive devices Adaptation to AD
Change in experience in day to day life
Changed societal attitude
Barriers to use of AD Limited physical accessibility to buildings and public places
Difficulty accessing public transport
Less access to variety and quality of devices
Sparse and costly services for repair and maintenance of devices
Psychological barriers Achieving better life Living independently
Feeling of achieving normalcy
Fulfillment of needs



Table 2. Demographic and Ads-related characteristics.

Variables Frequency Percent

Age
18–40

20

80.00
41–55
5
22.00
Education
Below high school
10
40.00
Above high school
Type of AD
15
60.00
Wheelchair/crutches/callipers
19
76.00
Walker/stick/orthotic shoes
2
08.00
Tricycle/ three-wheel automatic scooter
4
16.00
Duration of ADs (years)
0–10
4
16.00
10 and above
18
72.00
Intermittent use
3
12.00



Results
This study highlights the experiences of the mobility restricted individuals who use different ADs for performing their daily activ- ities. Table 2 summarizes the demographic characteristics of the respondents. There were 11 males and 14 females and all the respondents were aged between 18 and 55 years (mean ¼ 35.36±). The majority of the respondents (20 individuals) staying with their families while 5 were living alone. Some respondents were using more than one device at the same time. Different types of ADs used by the respondents were crutches, callipers, wheelchair, tricycle, stick, walker and specially designed shoes according to their requirements. Most of them used a combin- ation of ADs.
The experiences reflect achievements and concerns expressed by the respondents. The four main themes emerged out of the analysis of their experiences of using AD. The first theme of "access to AD's" explored accessibility issues regarding AD and the problems faced by the respondents while accessing the rehabilitation facilities. The second theme "life with AD" explained the changes in daily life, problems, adaptation to use of ADs. Third important theme was "barriers to use of AD". This theme gave insight into the challenges, interruptions in continuous use of ADs. The last theme "achieving a better life" described their overall experience of use of AD.
732 N. BORADE ET AL.

Theme: Access to AD
The respondents shared their experiences related to allied services that are provided to people with disabilities. The users expressed their disappointment with the arrogance and apathy displayed by the public health service providers. They reported lack of aware- ness about needs of the people with disabilities. Lack of coordin- ation between available services often led to delay in accessing the ADs. They also mentioned that their accessibility to govern- ment support services and programmes was delayed because of difficulties in obtaining the disability certification. Disability certifi- cation by government body enabled them to access rehabilitative services at minimal cost and many times free of cost. Obtaining such documentation was an important step towards access to AD. In the absence of access to government services, PWDs incurred out of pocket expenditure in the private medical sector. One of the male respondents aged 37 using scooter described his diffi- culties and disappointments with government services. He stated:
To get a disability certificate I visited 10 times to the office waiting in a queue for 2-3 hours. Being a disabled person it was very difficult for me. And the government employees were not helpful.
Financial constraints delayed the access and use of AD. Those who were dependent on private medical services, often skipped the appointments and did not follow the prescriptions issued as it involved greater out of pocket expenditure. Respondents men- tioned that their use of devices increased with their age, under- standing about their own needs, increased demands in daily life. Another reason for delay in acquiring ADs was lack of awareness among parents or care takers and belief in social practices. It was only when they themselves became aware and had urged to improve their life and mobility, they looked for opportunity to access appropriate devices.

Theme: Life with ADs
The AD played an important role in the respondent's life and changes were significant. The respondents shared their thoughts regarding AD and its use. They shared remarkable stories of adap- tation to the ADs. They adapted to the use of devices by practic- ing and improving their skills. When asked about the changes occurred after the use of ADs; they reported a lot of changes in performing daily activities .Reduced dependency on care takers was a highpoint for them. A respondent, 32 years of age who has been using callipers and crutches for last 19 years mentioned that,
Earlier my father or brother would carry me around … it became awkward as I grew older. Now I can do it on my own. That has given me relief from the constant sense of guilt and feeling of dependency.
Another aspect which is equally important and experienced by the respondent was changes in social life. Respondents reported that participation in meaningful social and economic activities led to gaining economic independence in life. Change in social atti- tude towards disabled individual was strongly reported by the respondents.
A male respondent aged 26 years of age who could not walk without support had endured a lot of suffering. He was given a faulty callipers and crutches which aggravated his disability and affected his movements and development in childhood. Later he received suitable assistive device and he got an opportunity to take higher education in a city. He said:
When people from village come to meet me here (in the city), they see what I have achieved in my life and now they look at me as a role model. These people had earlier ridiculed me and uncertain of my abilities.
Theme: Barriers to use of AD
Despite getting access to AD, respondents experienced limitations in physical accessibility to buildings and public places. This is because the public places lack disabled friendly arrangements.
 Lack of ramps or elevators, faulty ramps, and also other structural 
 barriers limited their access to certain public places. In addition, they experienced difficulties in using wheelchair or walking with crutches on narrow, crowded roads. Vehicles parked on the side- 
 walks or footpaths were also a major obstacle. Those using crutches and wheelchairs found it difficult to use footpath due to
 uneven surface, protruding broken tiles, manhole covers, unpaved 
 roads. Many wheelchair users who were older beyond 40 years suffered from incontinence. For them, finding toilets for the dis-
 abled and gaining access to them in a wheelchair was a major problem. A major concern expressed was accessing public trans- 
 port. The traditional public transport could not provide an effect- ive access service for people with disabilities, especially for disabled with wheelchair.
Lack of newer and quality devices was also reported as a con- cern by a few but many respondents concerned about the condi- tion of the device in use currently. Unavailability of repair and maintenance services was a major challenge. The respondents reported problems in finding a place to repair ADs. Even if serv- ices were found locally, services were expensive which led to the inconsistent use of the device or use of inappropriate device. One of the female respondents aged 42 years mentioned:
… .my wheelchair is broken, its accumulating dust now … no place to repair it nearby also I feel scared and inconvenient to use it outside on crowded roads with unruly traffic.
Therefore, they reported health issues associated with the use of ADs. Some of them had difficulties either at the initial stage of use or after using device for a long time. These complications were caused by using inappropriate device or faulty use due to lack of knowledge. For example, one of the respondents aged 29 years who is doing doctorate in the University shared his experience of wrong use of device which affected his develop- ment, negatively.
My parents didn't know about the assistive devices till I became 14 years then I started using orthotic shoes. I felt very uncomfortable, tight and heavy. The shoes made my walking miserable experience.
Psychological barriers were also experienced by the respond- ents. They were happy being independent but felt very unhappy about using ADs in public. As they thought they have induced negative reactions from others when they used ADs. Many reported stigmatizing attitude and problems with co-workers, employers. The problems at work place were attributed to the use of ADs, in addition to their disability status. At this point respondents find it difficult to separate out discrimination due to use of AD or being disabled. AD symbolized disability therefore; they thought the sight of AD evoked negative reactions from the people. One of the female respondents described her distressing experience at workplace.
I was selected for a job in a private office but the co-workers were very mean, non- cooperative and made me feel "different", often asked questions about calliper and shoes in a loud voice. I left the job soon.


Fourth theme: Achieving a better life
The subthemes which emerged from the data helped to under- stand the impact of AD. Almost all respondents expressed that liv- ing independently (more than earlier) including relief from mental
LIVED EXPERIENCES OF USE OF ASSISTIVE DEVICES 733

agony, and gaining confidence and ease of mobility, were import- ant benefits of their AD. The use of AD contributed enormously in achieving so called "normalcy" hence they reported increase in quality of life. One of the respondents aged 35 years who was using calliper and crutches for 22 years explained how he has been benefited by the use of AD. He mentioned:
I can roam around without bothering others and explore new places. This has given me a sense of confidence and changed my behaviour completely. I made new friends; I do not have an inferiority complex interacting with them anymore.
Another respondent aged 40 years using wheelchair for a few years now stated:
… now there is self-control in my life due to this wheelchair. I can do everything, this is the important aspect that has changed my life. It has helped me to attain normalcy in my life.
Additionally, respondents expressed positive changes and ful- fillment of needs to a great extent. For them, their device was blessings in disguise. A male respondent aged 60 year using wheelchair for 31 years and works for welfare of disabled individu- als said:
The organ which I don't have, I got it in the form of a wheelchair and actually this device is my legs because of this I am able to live with dignity.
Another respondent aged 30 years who stays in the University hostel stated:
I can walk because of these (orthotic) shoes. It feels like someone is there with me to support me … to help me. I feel blessed so I can do everything and I am stable now.


Discussion
The study represented a small cohort of adults with mobility dis- ability and provided evidence of the usefulness of AD, barriers to use of AD and identified likely impacts and outcomes. Data ana- lysis revealed several key concepts which helped to understand people's lived experiences of mobility impairment and access to AD. The study reveals that mobility is considered as a necessary capacity to participate in life meaningfully. The analysis demon- strated that mobility disabilities affected not only access to resources and but more importantly their dignity. The respond- ents were in the age group of 18–55 years, economically product- ive phase of life, and were distressed because their daily lives, employment opportunities and income were affected by disabilities.
AD helped them cope with the physical condition and enabled
them independence in daily activities. Study participants faced difficulties to adapt to the assistive devices in the early period. They also narrated stories of delay in receiving information, and necessary support from the family and health service providers. For optimum and consistent use of device the health care worker should provide information about how to use the devices to the user and family members. As suggested by earlier research, such help and support will eliminate the feeling of difficulty in adapta- tion and fear of injuring oneself while accepting the device [10,11]. None the less AD improved their mobility, participation and enhanced their ability to perform various activities. Another key component associated with AD was social participation. Respondents reported increased mobility resulting in greater social participation. This benefit is reported universally, as a study conducted in Canada [12] revealed that a simple introduction of

assistive device like wheelchair led to improved social participa- tion among users
 Rehabilitation services are an integral part of the health care system for the disabled individual and assistive device is a key component of this rehabilitate services.[4] Lack of knowledge about services was a major hurdle in acquiring and use of assist- ive devices in the present study. A study conducted in India also pointed out that accessibility, availability, and utilization of rehabilitation services and its cost-effectiveness are a major hurdle for disabled population [7]. These findings suggest the need for increasing awareness about rehabilitative services, especially about the assistive devices.
Several barriers exist for the use of assistive devices. These include repair and maintenance barriers, awareness barriers, psy- 
 chological barriers. These barriers may have a major impact on the lives and disabled individuals as well as their families in gen- eral, and may reduce the quality of life [13]. In low resource regions, these barriers coupled with financial barriers have a major impact on availability and accessibility of assistive technol- ogy. AD users faced several problems in use of the device as well as unfriendly infrastructure development. The various studies have reported that the disabled-friendly infrastructure development can have a positive effect on the people with disability which can lead to greater social inclusion and also environment factor influ- ence the participation of people with disability [14–16]. A lot of researches have dealt with creating barrier-free environments from a hardware perspective such as eliminating stairs and 
 improving the angle of incline on slopes. However, there has been very little research into improving the public's understand- ing of the issues faced by PWDs when they interact with physical or built environment [17]. ADs helped the users to achieve free- dom to move outside their household and their participation in society improved. However, difficulty in daily living, such as using toilets and bath rooms, cooking, movement within household was another problematic experience that most of the participants experienced but very little is discussed about that in the context of use of ADs. Therefore, researchers feel that probably concept of improved quality of life is restricted mainly to outside mobility, economic and social participation than improvement in daily liv- ing inside the house.
A significant part of the analysis deals with the improvement in quality of life of respondents after use of ADs. Quality of life, according to the respondents was their ability to perform activ- ities independently, ease of mobility and sense of achieving nor- malcy. The feelings are not necessarily of only these respondents but similar results are reported in other study conducted in Brazil [5].
In LMICs, disability and assistive devices have received very lit- tle attention from the public health policy makers. Therefore, the evidence generated by this study is important. As per our know- ledge, it is for the first time, systematic documentation of lived experiences of assistive device users is carried out in India.
However, the present study is not without limitations. The first inherent limitation of the study is that heterogeneity of partici- pants which might have affected the summation of lived experi- ences of the mobility affected disabled individuals. The second limitation is the limited number of participants, only 25 partici- pants were interviewed. Despite these limitations, the present study has added a lot to our understanding of the quality of life of AD users.
It is recommended that future research in this area may use homogenous group of participants and multiple techniques of data collections in order to come up with more valid, reliable and
734 N. BORADE ET AL.

meaningful findings to promote our understanding of ADs and its impact on life of its users.

Conclusion
The use of assistive devices leads to the improvement in function- ality, independence, and self-esteem. Assistive devices extend the opportunities to achieve "normalcy", as expressed by the partici- pants. Independence, life satisfaction and increased participation in social life possibly impact directly on their quality of life.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

References
Agmon M, Sa'ar A, Araten-Bergman T. The person in the disabled body: a perspective on culture and personhood from the margins. Int J Equity Health. 2016;15:147.
McColl MA, Jarzynowska A, Shortt SED. Unmet health care needs of people with disabilities: population level evi- dence. Disabil Soc. 2010;25:205–218.
Gottlieb A, Myhill WN, Blanck P. Employment of people with disabilities. In: International Encyclopedia of Rehabilitation. New York (NY): Center for International Rehabilitation Research Information and Exchange (CIRRIE); 2010. p. 1–9.
World Health Organization. World report on disability 2011. World Health Organisation and The World Bank; 2011. 91, 549.
Santos RF, dos Sampaio PYS, Sampaio RAC, et al. Tecnologiaassistiva e suasrelac¸o~es com a qualidade de vida de pessoas com defici^encia. Rev Ter Ocup Univ S~ao Paulo (Online). 2017;28:54.
World Health Organization. 2019. WHO convenes global stakeholders to improve access to assistive technology. Available from: https://www.who.int/medicines/news/2019/
WHO-convenes-global-stakeholders-to-improve-access-to-
AT/en/
Kumar S, Roy G, Kar S. Disability and rehabilitation services in India: issues and challenges. J Fam Med Primary Care. 2012;1:69.
Bright T, Wallace S, Kuper H. A systematic review of access to rehabilitation for people with disabilities in low- and middle-income countries. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15:2165.
Clandinin DJ, Huber J, McGaw B, et al. Narrative inquiry. In: McGaw B, Baker E, Peterson P editors. International Encyclopedia of Education. New York (NY): Elsevier; 2010.
p. 1–26.
Pain H, Wiles R. The experience of being disabled and obese. Disabil Rehabil. 2006;28:1211–1220.
Gramstad A, Storli SL, Hamran T. Exploring the meaning of a new assistive technology device for older individuals. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2014;9:493–498.
Rousseau-Harrison K, Rochette A, Routhier F, et al. Impact of wheelchair acquisition on social participation. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2009;4:344–352.
Weerasinghe IE, Fonseka P, Dharmaratne S, et al. Barriers in using assistive devices among a group of community- dwelling persons with lower limb disabilities in Sri Lanka. DCID. 2015;26:79.
McMillen A-M, So€derberg S. Disabled Persons' experience
of dependence on assistive devices. Scand J Occup Ther. 2002;9:176–183.
Clarke PJ. The role of the built environment and assistive devices for outdoor mobility in later life. J Gerontol Ser B: Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2014;69:S8–S15.
Hammel J, Magasi S, Heinemann A, et al. Environmental barriers and supports to everyday participation: a qualita- tive insider perspective from people with disabilities. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;96:578–588.
Tokuda K. Road transport barriers encountered by people with travel difficulties in Japan. IATSS Res. 2001;25:12–22.