Social Science & Medicine 273 (2021) 113775








Short communication
Understanding urban accessibility: A community-engaged pilot study of entrance features
Candace I.J. Nykiforuk a,b,1,*, Nicole M. Glenn a,1, Ian Hosler c, Heather Craig d,
Darcy Reynard a,e, Brittany Molner a, Jared Candlish a, Sammy Lowe a
a Centre for Healthy Communities, School of Public Health, University of Alberta, 3-035 Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, 11405 – 87 Ave, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1C9,
Canada
b Policy, Location and Access in Community Environments Research Lab, School of Public Health, University of Alberta, 3-300 Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, 11405
– 87 Ave, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1C9, Canada
c City of Edmonton, Urban Form and Corporate Strategic Development, City Planning, 6th Floor, Edmonton Tower, 10111-104 Ave, Edmonton, AB, T5J 0J4, Canada
d City of Edmonton, Citizen Services, 18th Floor, Edmonton Tower, 10111-104 Ave, Edmonton, AB, T5J 0J4, Canada
e Human Geography and Planning, University of Alberta, 1-26 Earth Sciences Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E3, Canada


A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords:
Accessibility
Built environment Inequity Disability Mobility
Engaged scholarship
A B S T R A C T 

The accessibility of the built environment is an equity issue. Accessibility standards for buildings exist, but often apply to new buildings or major renovations. This renders historic neighborhoods inaccessible. Accessibility standards and related assessments rarely consider the experiences and priorities of people who experience disability. Partnered with local government and an accessibility advisory committee, we conducted a pilot study of urban accessibility in Edmonton Edmon, Alberta, Canada. We measured four indicators of entranceway accessibility along a popular, central commercial corridor and mapped the data with building age using QGIS. We found significant accessibility barriers.



Introduction

Accessibility is essential to equal opportunities for social and civic participation and dignity for all people (House of Commons of Canada [HCC], 2018) and is particularly salient to members of underserved groups, including people who experience disability (Aldersey et al., 2018; United Nations, 2006; Weldrick and Grenier, 2018). Spaces and places that are universally accessible can mitigate social isolation and marginalization and promote participation among people who experi- ence disability (Andani et al., 2013; Blewett and Hanlon, 2016; Bromley et al., 2007). Accessibility is an issue of human rights and equity.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Dis- abilities (2006) explicitly outlines the right for persons with disabilities with regards to accessibility (Article 9). In relation, governments are expected to "take appropriate measures to ensure persons with disabil- ities access, on an equal basis with others, to the physical environment… and to other facilities and services open or provided to the public…"
(UN, 2006, Article 9). This entails the identification and elimination of obstacles and barriers in buildings among other physical and informa- tional contexts. The convention has been ratified globally by 181 States (Disabled World, 2020), including Canada (Government of Canada, 2018). Nevertheless, significant barriers to accessibility persist for people who experience disability. For example, researchers have high- lighted barriers to accessibility in homes, schools, and neighborhoods across Canada and globally (e.g., Aldersey et al., 2018; Bennett et al., 2009; Gharebaghi et al., 2018; Magagnin et al., 2014). This scholarship has infrequently included the priorities and experiences of people who experience disability (Aldersey et al., 2018; Blewett and Hanlon, 2016; Bromley et al., 2007; Calder et al., 2018).
Accessibly standards exist across the globe (e.g., Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, 2014; Standards New Zea- land, 2001) and at all levels of government in Canada, predominantly in building codes (e.g., City of Edmonton [COE], n. d.; Government of Alberta [GOA] & Safety Codes Council [SCC], 2017; National Research


* Corresponding author. Centre for Healthy Communities, School of Public Health, University of Alberta, 3-035 Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, 11405 – 87 Ave, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1C9, Canada.
E-mail addresses: candace.nykiforuk@ualberta.ca (C.I.J. Nykiforuk), nglenn@ualberta.ca (N.M. Glenn), ian.hosler@edmonton.ca (I. Hosler), heather.crowe@ edmonton.ca (H. Craig), reynard@ualberta.ca (D. Reynard), molner@ualberta.ca (B. Molner), jcandlis@ualberta.ca (J. Candlish), salowe@ualberta.ca (S. Lowe).
1 Candace I. J. Nykiforuk and N. M. Glenn contributed equally to the manuscript as co-first authors.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.113775
Received in revised form 18 December 2020; Accepted 9 February 2021
Available online 12 February 2021
0277-9536/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Council of Canada [NRCC], 2014). However, they vary widely, are often infrequently updated, and information on adherence is sparse, as is an understanding of their relevance to the daily lives of people who expe- rience barriers (Calder et al., 2018; Magagnin et al., 2014; McLeod et al., 2014). Community-engaged scholarship (Beaulieu et al., 2018) could address these gaps and inform the creation of equitable and inclusive policies and practices (Aldersey et al., 2018; Bromley et al., 2007; Calder et al., 2018). For the purpose of this study, we adopted Edmonton's definition of accessibility as outlined in their Accessibility for People with Disabilities policy (COE, 2019b, p. 2):
Accessibility refers to the absence of barriers that prevent individuals and/or groups from fully participating, contributing and benefiting from all social, economic, cultural, spiritual and political aspects of society. The term also refers to rights to access, and to universal design characteristics of products, devices, information, programs, services, infrastructure that enable independent use, or support when required, and access by people with a variety of disabilities.
Engaged scholarship takes research into communities (Boyer, 1996). Yet, few studies of urban accessibility have been explicitly community-engaged (Calder et al., 2018). To address this gap, we un- dertook a methodological pilot study on the accessibility of a popular urban destination in Edmonton, AB. The objectives were to establish meaningful partnerships and processes for collaboration on urban accessibility assessment, and, to assess the utility and feasibility of built environment audit metrics to measure entranceway accessibility. We report on the pilot findings and the process of engagement to highlight the accessibility barriers that exist in core urban neighborhoods and to encourage community-engaged scholarship in this area.

Materials & methods

The methodological pilot study was undertaken in partnership be- tween The Centre for Healthy Communities in the School of Public Health at the University of Alberta, the COE, and the Accessibility Advisory Committee (AAC) which advises City Council on policies and practices relevant to people who experience disability and is comprised of folks who experience diverse forms of disability. Our focus on urban accessibility arose because it was a priority for the COE partners and members of the AAC. The process of co-creation involved focusing on a single attribute of urban accessibility (i.e., primary commercial en- tranceways) and then identifying a sub-set of measures for that attribute. We focused on the primary entranceways to align with identified in- terests of the practice partners, which prioritized universal inclusion and the promotion of dignity for all people. The selection of the entranceway by the AAC aligns with research that found doors were identified most frequently among people who experience diverse forms of disability as a top concern (McLeod et al., 2014). Input from the AAC was prioritized during the selection of the four indicators to be measured and the study site. We understood that these measures were limited with regards to capturing urban accessibility for people who experience diverse forms of disability. Focusing on a single attribute (i.e., entranceways) meant we were missing vital information about the surrounding built environment (e.g., stairs, pavement condition). However, following the guidance from members of AAC, we decided to focus on these measures that are mostly relevant to mobility, because existing standards and measure- ment protocols were available for them and appropriate to the time and funding constraints of a pilot study. At the same time, these measures provided an opportunity to test the audit protocol, gather relevant in- formation about local accessibility, and deepen our community-engaged partnership. Once we established research priorities, scope, pilot site, and methods, the researchers drafted a study protocol in a shared electronic document for team members to alter. COE partners liaised with the AAC to ensure their perspectives were included.
We performed a systematic observational audit of commercial and
retail businesses that were open to the public at the time between 109 Street and 99 Street on Whyte Avenue, a historic commercial corridor (i. e., Explore Edmonton & Tourism Alberta, n. d.). Storefronts housing businesses dominate the 10 selected blocks. Whyte Avenue is an arterial road that was once the main street in Edmonton. It is now a heritage area that functions as an arts and entertainment hub (e.g., it has a density of theaters, caf´es, bars) and a trendy shopping destination. We measured entranceways facing Whyte Avenue, which meant the back and side entrances were not included. In the case there was more than one entranceway facing Whyte Avenue, all were assessed and the most accessible one was coded as primary.
Although we did not require informed consent to perform the audit, we provided staff with information and asked for permission to take the measurements. In the case where permission was declined, we did not proceed. We followed existing measurement protocols to assess four accessibility indicators: doorway width; hardware; threshold height; and, the force required to open/close (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.). Three research assistants field tested our data collection protocol (e.g., timing, measurement protocols, single/pair data collection) on one block of Whyte Avenue. A team of two research assistants collected the data over three days (approx. 15 h total) in August 2018. The weather on these three days was sunny and warm. One research assistant took the measurements while the other recorded the data into REDCap via an application on the mobile device (Apple iPad, Model #MR722CL/A). They also recorded business name, address, open/close status, type of business, number of entrances, Global Positioning System (GPS) co- ordinates, and weather conditions.
We determined business classifications based on the COE Zoning Bylaw (City of Edmonton, 2017). We measured the clear width of all
 doors for each business using a metric tape measure and recorded to the 
 nearest mm the distance between the interior face of the door and the 
 face of the door stop opposite while the door was open to 90 (GOA &
SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.). To calculate the threshold height measurement, we used two rulers (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.). The first ruler was placed horizontally on top of the threshold extending towards the exterior finished floor. The second ruler was placed vertically on top of the exterior floor surface creating an intersection with the first ruler. We classified door hardware based on the primary movement involved in operating the door: twisting (i.e., doorknob, lever handle), pulling (i.e., handle set, pull plate, horizontal/vertical pull bar), and pushing (i.e., push plate, horizontal/vertical push bar) (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.). We asked yes/no questions (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.): Is the door operable with one hand? Does the door require tight grasping to oper- ate? Does the door require excessive pinching or twisting? To measure the force required to open the door, we used a spring-style gauge (Pro- fessional Service Industries Inc., 1994) and recorded the value in pounds (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.). We repeated the measure three times and used the average in our analysis.
The data for the primary entrance of each business was coded ac- cording to established standards (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.): the
door has accessible hardware; door width threshold >850 mm; the threshold height <13 mm; and the average force required to open the door <8.5 lbs. Data were then analyzed using descriptive statistics in IBM SPSS (v. 25, 2017). We excluded businesses with missing data for
any of the four accessibility indicators. Primary entrances that were operable via automation were classified as accessible for opening force and door hardware measures. We used QGIS (2019), the collected GPS coordinates, and property assessment data from the COE's Open Data Portal (2019a) to spatially visualize the data to determine if there were any relationships between building age (i.e., relative to building stan- dards from different eras, potential spatial patterns of buildings meeting current accessibility standards) and accessibility. We spatially joined the entrance location points to the building footprints from OpenStreetMap (2015). It was important to spatially locate the entrances as one building could have multiple businesses, each with one main entrance, that could have had differing compliance to accessibility standards.

Results


three accessibility indicators in Table 1.
We assessed the relationship between the four accessibility in- dicators and standards (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.); see Figs. 1 and 2. Only 4% of the primary entrances measured met all four indicator standards.
Using QGIS, we did not find a significant statistical relationship be- tween meeting accessibility standards and building age, with the exception of door width, which increased as building age decreased. Due to the way standards are applied (i.e., to new builds or extensive reno- vations), we had anticipated seeing a relationship for all four indicators.
Discussion

Our pilot revealed a feasible approach to understanding urban accessibility and informing policies and practices. We saw extensive accessibility barriers. Other researchers have reported similar physical barriers in the urban built environment. For example, a study of curb cuts in central Halifax, Nova Scotia reported that less than three percent met all of the eight criteria measured (Bennett et al., 2009).
Typically, older buildings do not need to meet new building codes unless significant renovations have taken place since the codes were established (NRCC, 2014). Because of this, we had anticipated finding a relationship between building age and entranceway accessibility. However, our results demonstrated no relationship between building age and number of entranceway accessibility standards met. Not included in our analysis were a history and timeline of renovations made to the buildings. More robust research on the relationship between accessibility standards and building age is required to better understand this phenomenon and inform the way building codes are applied to improve urban accessibility.
Governments across the globe (Disability World, 2020) and within Canada are increasingly focused on promoting accessibility and equity for people who experience disability (e.g., HCC, 2018; COE, n. d.). Nevertheless, our findings showed that more is required to create urban environments that fully support the meaningful inclusion of all citizens, particularly people who experience mobility-related disabilities. Research on urban accessibility that considers practical municipal con- cerns and/or people with lived-experiences to guide practice and policy is sparse (Aldersey et al., 2018; Blewett and Hanlon, 2016; Bromley et al., 2007; Calder et al., 2018; McLeod et al., 2014). Existing evidence has revealed that barriers to accessibility exist in most urban settings (Aldersey et al., 2018; Bennett et al., 2009; Gharebaghi et al., 2018; Magagnin et al., 2014; McLeod et al., 2014). Furthermore, the existing standards may not appropriately meet the needs of folks who experience disability and therefore miss the intended equity goals. For example, a

Table 1
Door clear width, threshold, and force measurements.



Fig. 1. Primary entrances meeting current accessibility standards.

doorway can meet the 850 mm width required of building standards (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d.) while excluding people who use larger scooters or wheelchairs. More comprehensive approaches to urban accessibility that prioritize the voices of people who experience barriers to accessibility are necessary to guide meaningful municipal action (McLeod et al., 2014). Community-engaged scholarship offers one way forward in this regard (Beaulieu et al., 2018). An example of a strength of this approach was the dissemination of the findings within the public and practice spheres. The COE partners shared findings with COE City Council and the Old Strathcona Business Association while the research team published a widely distributed and publicly available newsletter to highlight the results (using an infographic) and ongoing projects focused on urban accessibility (see https://universityofalberta5.createsend.
com/campaigns/reports/viewCampaign.aspx?d=d&c=DD91C7E1B 800A1A3&ID=9F876B1C746A66512540EF23F30FEDED&temp=Fals
e&tx=0&source=Report).
Key learnings from this pilot study confirm that meaningful collab- oration in research take time, resources, trust, and considerable commitment from all partners involved to build and sustain momentum (Findlay et al., 2015). Our community-researcher partnership spanned years, which began between CN and IH in 2008. The team was grown by inviting others with whom they had existing relationships with expertise in research/urban accessibility. This snowball approach meant that all team members had previous experience working with at least one other team member, which expedited the trust and relationship-building process.
The co-creation of the pilot project highlighted several challenges to doing community-engaged scholarship as well as opportunities for cre- ative solutions. There was the issue of time and burden of commitment to consider. This was particularly relevant to the engagement of mem- bers of the AAC, who participated in the committee as unpaid volun- teers. To minimize the potential additional burden of participation, our engagement with them primarily took place during their already scheduled monthly meetings. HC, who attended the meetings as the city liaison, facilitated the two-way communication between the committee and the rest of the research team. Members of the research team were also invited to attend meetings to engage in discussions of the project (e. g., to report on the pilot study findings and ask about next steps). We also found that creative participation and diverse communication stra- tegies (e.g., Google Document for asynchronous dialogue, phone and in- person meetings, email updates) facilitated participation of the practice partners beyond tokenism without an excessive burden (Findlay et al., 2015). Clear and concise communication was essential to the process of continued engagement. The trust that already existed between the team members enabled us to discuss how people preferred to be engaged and adjust our strategies as needed. Finding the balance between keeping everyone up-to-date and involved while not overwhelming them with day-to-day details was key.
Door Clear Width (mm)
Threshold Height (mm)
Force Required to Open (lbs)
Our findings were limited due to the pilot nature of this study, which
was designed to test the feasibility and utility of our street audit
Mean 854 26 12
Median 840 16 12
Range 690–2540 0–260 3–30
approach for scale-up in future initiatives. We established the feasibility of such an approach – data collection on ten city blocks took approxi- mately 15 h for two research assistants. We recommend future




Fig. 2. Number of accessibility standards met by measured primary building entrance.

investigations explore a more complete picture of accessibility including communication and/or technology, systemic social barriers (e.g., pol- icies, norms; Gharebaghi et al., 2018), activity spaces, transportation, the broader environment surrounding buildings, accessible journeys, and additional built environment features, such as stairs (Hamzat and Dada, 2005; McLeod et al., 2014). Weather (e.g., heavy rain, wind, heat, snow, ice) can exacerbate experiences of inaccessibility (Aldersey et al., 2018; Blewett and Hanlon, 2016). This is particularly true in winter cities, such as Edmonton, where the lack of snow and ice clearance can impede mobility for extended periods (Gharebaghi et al., 2018). It also demonstrates how physical (e.g., snow) and socio-political (e.g., lack of bylaws, enforcement, and/or removal) barriers are intertwined and need to be examined in relation to one another (Blewett and Hanlon, 2016; Gharebaghi et al., 2018) – a fruitful line of future enquiry. Having research assistants who do not experience disability assess subjective measures (e.g., excessive pinch/grasping/twisting) highlights an addi- tional limitation of our data and also with regards to the measure itself. Our focus on four entranceway accessibility measures provided a limited glimpse into the accessibility of the buildings we assessed. These measures, although relevant to people who use wheelchairs or scooters, do not highlight the exclusion of other folks who experience diverse forms of disability. Accessibility is about more than physical access (McLeod et al., 2014). In fact, we suggest going beyond accessibility and adopting a universal design approach and considering the creative possibilities of starting with disability (see Boys, 2014). Gathering in- formation on visual, auditory, and other sensory features that can facilitate or impede accessibility (e.g., lighting, clear signage, coloured paths, textured flooring) would deepen our understanding of universal access and the related barriers to inclusion for all, particularly folks who
experience disability.
Future research could also consider diverse accessibility standards since they can vary widely. For example, in New Zealand the minimum entranceway standard is 760 mm (Standards New Zealand, 2001)
compared to the 850 mm (GOA & SCC, 2017; COE, n. d) in our study. Researchers have previously found accessible spaces lacking in acces- sible routes (Hamzat and Dada, 2005), and social barriers to be as sig- nificant as physical barriers (Blewett and Hanlon, 2016; Bromley et al., 2007). Comprehensive data that employs robust methodologies is required to guide urban accessibility policy development and promote equitable and inclusive environments (Nykiforuk et al., 2013). Taking a community-engaged approach can ensure diverse perspectives and meaningful collaboration with decision makers and people with lived-experiences.

Conclusions

Urban accessibility is an equity issue that is increasingly on the radar of governments in Canada and globally. Research to inform policies and practices in urban accessibility is sparse and has rarely built on engagement with decision-makers and/or people with lived-experiences of accessibility barriers. The results of our community-engaged meth- odological pilot study may inspire more investigations of urban acces- sibility, which can help to shape policies to promote equity and inclusion in cities worldwide.

Credit author statement

Candace I. J. Nykiforuk: Conceptualization, Methodology, Re- sources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Visualization, Funding acquisition, Nicole M. Glenn: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Ian Hosler: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Heather Craig: Conceptualization, Meth- odology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing, Darcy Reynard: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing, Brittany Molner: Investi- gation, Writing – review & editing, Jared Candlish: Conceptualization,

Methodology, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Sammy Lowe: Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing

Declaration of competing interest

Funding for this project was provided through CIJN's Applied Public Health Chair from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research in part- nership with the Public Health Agency of Canada and Alberta Innovates – Health Solutions (2014–2019; CPP 137909). The funder had no in- fluence on the study design and/or results.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the support in early stages of study design, data collection, and field testing provided by Laura Nieuwendyk, Gabrielle Donoff, and Nathanael Skagen. We thank the members of Edmonton City Council's Accessibility Advisory Committee for their contribution to the pilot study design and their feedback and insights throughout the proj- ect. We thank the reviewers for their insightful comments that strengthened this manuscript.

References

Aldersey, H., Quadir, M.M., Akter, S., Mozumder, R.H., Nazneen, N., Nuri, R.P., 2018. Barriers and facilitators for wheelchair users in Bangladesh: a participatory action research project. Disabil. CBR Inclus. Develop. 29 (2) https://doi.org/10.5463/ DCID.v29i2.730.
Andani, A., Rostron, J., Bertyesilisik, B., 2013. An investigation into access issues affecting historic built environment. Am. J. Civ. Eng. Architect. 1 (2), 21–31. http:// pubs.sciepub.com/ajcea/1/2/1.
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, USA, 2014. ADA and ABA Accessibility Guidelines. Retrieved on Sept. 30, 2020. https://www.access-board. gov/guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-ada-standards/guide- to-the-ada-standards/chapter-4-entrances,-doors,-and-gates.
Beaulieu, M., Breton, M., Brousselle, A., 2018. Conceptualizing 20 years of engaged scholarship: a scoping review. PloS One 13 (2), e0193201. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pone.0193201.
Bennett, S., Kirby, R.L., Macdonald, B., 2009. Wheelchair accessibility: descriptive survey of curb ramps in an urban area. Disabil. Rehabil. Assist. Technol. 4 (1), 17–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/17483100802542603.
Blewett, J., Hanlon, N., 2016. Disablement as inveterate condition: living with habitual ableism in prince george, British columbia. Can. Geogr. 60 (1), 46–55. https://doi. org/10.1111/cag.12254.
Boyer, E.L., 1996. The scholarship of engagement. J. Public Serv. Outreach 1 (1), 11–20. Boys, J., 2014. Doing Disability Differently. Routledge, New York, NY.
Bromley, R.D.F., Mathews, D.L., Thomas, C.J., 2007. City centre accessibility for wheelchair users: the consumer perspective and the planning implications. Cities 24 (3), 229–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2007.01.009.
Calder, A., Sole, G., Mulligan, H., 2018. The accessibility of fitness centers for people with disabilities: a systematic review. Disabil. Health J. 11 (4), 525–536. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2018.04.002.
City of Edmonton. (n.d.). Checklist for accessibility & universal design. Retrieved 30 October 2019 from: https://www.edmonton.ca/transportation/PDF/ChecklistAcc essibilityUniversalDesign.pdf.
City of Edmonton, 2017. Zoning Bylaw No. 12800. Retrieved. https://www.edmonton.ca
/documents/PDF/current_Zoning_Bylaw.pdf. (Accessed 30 October 2019).
City of Edmonton, 2019a. City of Edmonton's Open Data Portal. Retrieved. https://data. edmonton.ca/. (Accessed 30 October 2019).
City of Edmonton, 2019b. Accessibility for People with Disabilities, C602. Retrieved. htt ps://www.edmonton.ca/city_government/documents/PoliciesDirectives/C602.pdf. (Accessed 6 January 2020).
Disabled World, 2020. CRPD List of Countries by Signature: Confirmation: Accession: Ratification. Retrieved on Sept. 29, 2020. https://www.disabled-world.com/disab ility/discrimination/crpd-milestone.php.
Explore Edmonton & Tourism Alberta. (n.d.). Old Strathcona & Whyte Ave. Retrieved 30 October 2019 from: https://exploreedmonton.com/attractions-and-experiences/old- strathcona-whyte-avenue.
Findlay, I.M., Lovrod, M., Quinlan, E., Teucher, U., Sayok, A.K., Bustamante, S., Domshy, D., 2015. Building critical community engagement through scholarship: three case studies. Engaged Scholar J. 1 (1), 33–50.
Gharebaghi, A., Mostafavi, M.-A., Chavoschi, S.H., Edwards, Fougeyrollas, P., 2018. The role of social factors in the accessibility of urban areas for people with motor disabilities. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 7 (4), 131–148. https://doi.org/10.3390/ ijgi7040131.
Government of Alberta & Safety Codes Council, 2017. Barrier-free Design Guide, fifth ed.
Retrieved. http://www.safetycodes.ab.ca/Public/Documents/Barrier-Free-De sign-Guide_WEB-Aug2019.pdf. (Accessed 30 October 2019).
Government of Canada, 2018. Rights of People with Disabilities. Retrieved on 29 Sept. 2020. https://www.canada.ca/en/canadian-heritage/services/rights-people-disabili ties.html.
Hamzat, T.K., Dada, O.O., 2005. Wheelchair accessibility of public buildings in Ibadan, Nigeria. Asia Pacific Disabil. Rehabilit. J. 16 (2), 115–124.
House of Commons Canada, 2018, November 27. An Act to Ensure a Barrier-free Canada, Bill C-81. Retrieved. https://www.parl.ca/DocumentViewer/en/42-1/bill/C-81/thir d-reading. (Accessed 30 October 2019).
Magagnin, R.C., do Prado, M.D., Vanderlei, C., B, 2014. The municipal urban accessibility policy in a medium-sized city: the case of Bauru-Brazil. In: Proceedings of XVIII Congreso Panamericano de Ingenieria de Transito. Transporte y Logísitca, Santander.
McLeod, D., Perese, L., Croft, L., Rowland, T., Grant, H., 2014, June. Consultation Report: Access to Buildings for People with Disabilities. Retrieved on 29 Sept., 2020. https
://www.mbie.govt.nz/dmsdocument/7303-malatest-report-access-to-buildings-fo r-people-with-disabilities.
National Research Council of Canada, 2014. Alberta Building Code, ninth ed. National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON.
Nykiforuk, C.I.J., Schopflocher, D., Vallianatos, H., Spence, J.C., Raine, K.D., Plotnikoff, R.C., VanSpronsen, E., Nieuwendyk, L.M., 2013. Community Health and the Built Environment: examining place in a Canadian chronic disease prevention project. Health Promot. Int. 28 (2), 257–268. https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/ dar093.
OpenStreetMap contributors, 2015. Planet Dump [Data File]. Retrieved. https://planet. openstreetmap.org. (Accessed 30 October 2019).
QGIS Development Team, 2019. QGIS Geographic Information System. Open Source Geospatial Foundation Project. http://qgis.osgeo.org.
Standards New Zealand New Zealand, 2001. Design for Access and Mobility – Building and Associated Facilities (NZS 4121:2001). Retrieved from Standards New Zealand on Sept. 30, 2020. https://www.standards.govt.nz/assets/Publication-files
/BSP/NZS4121-2001.pdf.
United Nations, 2006. Conventions on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Retrieved on Sept. 29, 2020. https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities
/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/convention-on-the-rights- of-persons-with-disabilities-2.html.
Weldrick, R., Grenier, A., 2018. Social isolation in later life: extending the conversation.
Can. J. Aging 37 (1), 76–83. https://doi.org/10.1017/S071498081700054X.