Wellbeing, Space and Society 2 (2021) 100058










Everyday built environments of care: Examining the socio-spatial relationalities of suburban neighbourhoods for people living with dementia
Samantha Biglieri a,*, Jennifer Dean b
a School of Urban and Regional Planning, Ryerson University, ON, Canada
b School of Planning, University of Waterloo, ON, Canada


A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords:
Dementia
Built environment Care
Accessibility Public space Disability
A B S T R A C T 

There has been a call from US policy advisors to expand research on people living with dementia (PLWD) from health and social sectors to urban planning. The World Health Organization projects the number of PLWD to increase from 47 to 132 million worldwide by 2050, with 60–80% of PLWD residing within the community (as opposed to congregate settings). For PLWD, being supported by their neighbourhoods in terms of access has many benefits: more social interaction, sense of worth, dignity, and improved physical/mental health. As PLWD are likely to experience a "shrinking world" effect, it is important to investigate the socio-spatial relationality between PLWD and their neighbourhoods. Using a relational care lens, this research seeks to understand the everyday practices of seven (7) PLWD in their suburban neighbourhoods using multiple methods (semi-struc- tured and go-along interviews, GPS tracking, travel diaries). PLWD interact with their neighbourhoods through processes of caring for self in the past, present, and future, in addition to (re)organizing their newfound inter- dependent realities and being cared for through human and more-than-human encounters in public spaces. This research demonstrated the ways in which PLWD were living through adversity in the built environment ("hopeful adaptation"), revealing innovative practices and structural barriers in suburban areas. Being able to access one's neighbourhood is a right, and this research highlights how certain socio-spatial characteristics of suburban neighbourhoods can, through a relational care lens, become a simultaneously caring and careless place.



Introduction

Researchers have recently called for more relational understandings of everyday life for individuals living with disabilities, as a way to interrogate why able bodies move through built environments with apparent ease (Hall and Wilton, 2017; Power et al., 2019). This is sig- nificant given the global rise of many disabilities, including dementia, which is set to double by 2050 to 132 million individuals worldwide (WHO, 2017). Notably, 60–80% of people living with dementia (PLWD) reside in community rather than care facilities, indicating local neigh- bourhoods as significant sites of everyday activities for PLWD. Addi- tionally, access to local neighbourhoods for PLWD means better physical and mental wellbeing, and a sense of independence and dignity (Burton and Mitchell, 2006). Further research on population inequalities in wellbeing have shown that over time, wellbeing is not just related to individual attributes, but also to one's residential community environ- ment. This supports the need to develop interventions that seek to change local conditions to improve wellbeing and reduce inequalities
(Curtis et al., 2020).
Dementia refers to a set of symptoms (e.g., declining memory, spatial navigation, communication, depth perception) caused by a variety of diseases, the most common being Alzheimer's disease - a progressive condition without a cure (WHO, 2017). Dementia is a disability (Shakespeare et al., 2017) and people living with dementia face unique challenges in accessing their neighbourhood not experienced by simi- larly aged counterparts. For example, a study of mobility patterns found that older adults with mild dementia travelled on average 400 m from their homes while persons without dementia travelled 1.5 km (Shoval et al., 2011). This "shrinking world" effect for PLWD is caused by both individual (e.g., changing abilities, reduced confidence) and structural factors (e.g., unsafe community design; stigma and fear of mental illness) (Bartlett and Brannelly, 2019; Blackman et al., 2003; Duggan et al., 2008; Lloyd and Stirling, 2015; Neubauer et al., 2018). Existing spatial research on experiences of PLWD in their neighbourhoods is nascent and has tended to be fragmented across disciplinary silos that keep spatial and social aspects of neighbourhood separate. Finally,


* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: samantha.biglieri@ryerson.ca (S. Biglieri), jennifer.dean@uwaterloo.ca (J. Dean).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wss.2021.100058
Received 19 February 2021; Received in revised form 30 July 2021; Accepted 28 September 2021
Available online 9 October 2021
2666-5581/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

recent scoping reviews have highlighted have highlighted a gap in planning, policy and design aspects for dementia-inclusive communities (Gan et al., 2021), and further research needs to explore how environ- mental features impact wellbeing, and in diverse built environments (Sturge et al., 2021).
There has been a shift by scholars who view neighbourhoods as 'relational places' where people with dementia actively adapt to and remake their local environment through their lived experiences (Ward et al., 2021; Campbell et al., 2019). This perspective aligns with long- standing theories of place by urban scholars and geographers who acknowledged the reality of the social-spatial dialectic (Lefebvre, 1996; Soja, 1996), and that neighbourhoods are comprised of non-static and fluid relations. However, there is still much to know about how PLWD experience their local environments using a theoretically robust lens; one that is emotional, particular, relational, embodied, and contextual (Keyes et al., 2019; Williams, 2017). Accordingly, this paper furthers this perspective on neighbourhoods by exploring these kinds of relations through a theoretically robust care lens, with an explicit grounding in experiences of place. This paper draws on empirical work examining how PLWD experience suburban neighbourhoods through everyday practices to understand how places and care relations at all scales can support their wellbeing.
This paper argues for the adoption of 'care' as an analytical lens to understand relational neighbourhood experiences of everyday life for PLWD by exploring their in-situ experiences in suburban neighbour- hoods. This relational care lens is particularly powerful in that it can help organize and situate care relations in a multi-scalar fashion that recognizes the interconnectedness and fluidity between humans, more- than-human others, built environments, policies, programs and broader socio-cultural political structures through time. Using a constructivist grounded theory approach, results reveal how PLWD care for themselves in place over time, how PLWD manage their relationships with others in public spaces, and how these relations impact PLWD's experiences of familiar places. The paper ends with a discussion of the structural in- equities faced by PLWD in their neighbourhoods and articulates a theoretical understanding of what it means to care for oneself and others, as well as being cared for in everyday suburban life.

PLWD in neighbourhood space

While there is ample evidence suggesting that health and wellbeing for PLWD is impacted by more than the neuropathology of dementia (e. g., personal histories, social interactions, socio-cultural contexts) (O'Connor et al., 2007), research on the impact of the built environment is still in its infancy (Biglieri, 2018; Gan et al., 2021). To date, research has suggested that for PLWD, supportive neighbourhood environments can enhance the quality of life and provide "a significant arena for people to draw upon their personal potential and capabilities in order to compensate for the limitations they experience" (Ward et al., 2018, p. 877). In alignment with this perspective, research found that PLWD who engage in neighbourhood walking can offset the "shrinking world effect" (Odzakovic et al., 2018). Further, supportive neighbourhoods have been suggested to serve as a cognitive reserve for PLWD, in which certain built environment features (e.g., proximity to community centres and public transport) were associated with less cognitive decline and considered a protective factor (Clarke et al., 2012, 2015). Conversely, some studies indicate that engagement with neighbourhood space can be wellbeing inhibiting for PLWD. A study using a critical disability lens found that going outside revealed an experience of ontological vulner- ability amongst PLWD through "an awareness of failing knowledge about oneself or the 'rules' of outdoor life" (Bartlett and Brannelly, 2019, p. 6). Together, these studies present conflicting perspectives on the role of the neighbourhood for PLWD, and highlight the need for context-specific relational research that understands the realities of the impairment and acknowledges the structures that influence individual experiences to develop future practices to help PLWD to live well in their
current environments.
Within this growing body of research, there have been attempts to understand everyday life for PLWD at the neighbourhood scale, how- ever, this work has often kept social and spatial aspects separate. For example, sociologists and gerontologists have tended to examine neighbourhoods as part of the life space of PLWD (Lloyd and Stirling, 2015), sources of identity and inclusion (Duggan et al., 2008), both therapeutic and frightening (Brittain et al., 2010), supportive of self- hood and wellbeing (Odzakovic et al., 2018), and a site of "emphemeral encounters" (Ward et al., 2018). These studies, while occurring in geographic areas, often treat neighbourhoods as a container or treat the built environment as an secondary factor, focusing primarily on agency of the individual and their ability to cope/ remake spaces over structural issues.
Conversely, research by planners, architects and occupational ther- apists has examined everyday life of PLWD from a perspective that prioritize the spatial. Specifically, these studies assess the unilateral ef- fects of the built environment on PLWD's health and well-being based on proximity to amenities (e.g., grocery stores), street layouts (Brorsson et al., 2011; 2013; 2014), trip-making and travel route choices (Burton and Mitchell, 2006), and the level of dementia-friendliness of built form (Fleming et al., 2017) and land use/urban design (Biglieri, 2018). Many of these studies lack meaningful engagement with the social, including the influence of personal histories in how PLWD navigate and interact with their neighbourhood. In our work, we align with other scholars (Clark et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Ward et al., 2021) who view neigh- bourhoods as relational places that involve diverse social interactions between individuals, networks and infrastructures. Existing research on neighbourhoods as relational spaces for PLWD have focused on coping strategies to build or strengthen social connections in place through developing friendships, participating in organizations, walking in the community, or seeking out quiet spaces or lively places (Odzakovic et al., 2021). Finally, other work has discussed how familiarity is pro- duced within the neighbourhood for people with dementia – as knowl- edge, as part of a routine, providing a sense of security and safety, as a place that they can participate in (but changes like weather might make it unfamiliar), and landmarks as spatial reference points (Margot-Cattin et al., 2021). Adopting a relational view of place addresses the recent calls from Kontos et al. (2017) to use relationality to understand the lives of PLWD, and from MacDonald (2018) to apply a relational lens in order to shift dominant cultural views of dementia.
In this paper, we expand on the relational approach adopted by
scholars above to encompass a care lens (Fisher and Tronto, 1990; Lawson, 2008; Amin, 2012; Bowlby 2012; Imrie and Kullman, 2017; Williams, 2017; Rosa, 2019). This relational care lens allows us to interrogate the everyday practices of PLWD in place as multi-scalar and multi-temporal as well as specific socio-spatial relations as caring or careless. This enables practitioners and researchers to examine the ways in which people with dementia remake spaces to support themselves, while also identifying disabling barriers at multiple scales and temporalities.

Theorizing PLWD in place

Despite the growing and diverse body of literature on PLWD (with some exceptions of recent relational neighbourhood work), there is generally a paucity of work that reflects the socio-spatial as a relational, multi-scalar, temporally sensitive, and dynamic phenomenon (Andrews et al., 2013; Corburn, 2009; Cummins et al., 2007). A relational approach accounts for our knowledge of the world through embodied experiences, those hybrid assemblages of human bodies and more-than-human objects (e.g., technology, flora, fauna, built environ- ments) that vary between individuals, across space and over time (Andrews et al., 2013). Such a perspective allows researchers to examine macro- and micro-processes at diverse scales and richly describe "the nature of these relations and their consequences" (Skinner et al., 2015,

p. 788) for PLWD. Particularly relevant to PLWD, a relational lens ac- knowledges that our relationships in and with place are shaped by our life histories.
Relationality has been utilized to examine everyday experiences in critical disability studies (CDS). More specifically, relational approaches have interrogated the disabling nature of environments (i.e., the social model of disability) and an individual's embodied relational de- pendencies on human and more-than-human actors. Scholars have acknowledged the fluditiy of these experiences over time and the com- plex layering of actors, structures, and embodied impairment (Goodley et al., 2019; Hall and Wilton, 2017). For example, Hall and Wilton (2017) call for future research focus on relational dependencies for disabled people to "make explicit the specific relational connections and material contexts that allow 'able bodies' to act with apparent ease" (p. 14). These dependencies can be at all scales, including but not limited to technology, aspects of the built environment, transportation system, prosthetics, and diverse relationships that can be illuminated through a lens of care.
An expanded definition of care began with Fisher and Tronto (1990): "[Caring] can be viewed as a species activity that includes everything we do to maintain, continue and repair our 'world' so that we can live in it as well as possible. That world includes our bodies, ourselves and our environment, all of which we seek to interweave in a complex, life-sustaining web" (p. 40). In geography, this definition has been adopted and expanded through time and scale in a way that is emotional, particular, relational, embodied, and contextual (Lawson, 2008; Williams, 2017). It has been used to study phenomena like: global networks of formal/informal care, caring relations within institutions, and caring for natural environments (Jones, 2019; Lawson, 2007). It has also been used to describe encounters in public space as a form of care, and how people engage in self-care in these spaces (Amin, 2012; Imrie and Kullman, 2017; Rosa, 2019). Further, Bowlby (2012) argues care relations are not static, but rather occurs across time and space, and one must examine the individual's life-course, individual and collective memory, and daily body rhythms (p. 2108). A care perspective en- courages researchers to think of interdependencies between human and more-than-human entities (instead of the dichotomous care giver–care receiver relationship), to examine the ordinary, and to look at socio-cultural-political structures at the same time as agency and embodiment (Rosa, 2019). While care has been critiqued for being paternalistic by disability and dementia scholars, the concept is not necessarily oppressive (Keyes et al., 2015), and an ethic of care is a way of "centralising the experiences of people with dementia in order to design responses required to promote citizenship" (Brannelly, 2016, p.
306). A care lens focuses on interdependency, rejecting the false di-
2012). Further, a recent scoping review (Struge et al., 2021) has called for more attention to the contextual differences between different types of neighbourhoods, with most dementia-related research being situated in urban or rural contexts, neglecting the in-between - suburban places. The research opted for a multi-method, participatory approach, com- mon in research with PLWD (Phillipson and Hammond, 2018). Experi- ential methods included multiple go-along interviews (Carpiano, 2009; Lee and Dean, 2018), GPS tracking (Shoval et al., 2011), and travel diary recordings (Hand et al., 2018). The diverse qualitative methods captured meanings and interpretations of place over time and were complemented by participatory geospatial techniques "to address spatial, social, perceptual, and other elements of person-place trans- actions" (Hand et al., 2017, p. e48). Our multi-method approach was selected to explore the complex socio-spatial relations of place for PLWD. An in-depth explanation of the overall research project including rapport building is detailed elsewhere (Biglieri 2019; S. Biglieri 2021a). This study took place in the Regional Municipality of Waterloo, Ontario, where the number of PLWD was projected to increase by 187% between 2011 and 2036, from 6365 to 18,314 (Hopkins, 2010). This participatory study included seven participants who self-identified as living with mild-to-moderate dementia and were members of a dementia-specific community program. Participants ranged in age from
57 to 81 and all lived in their own home (See Table 1).
The research study took place over seven months and began with a semi-structured introductory interview. The interview questions focused on places they have lived over time, their past and present mobility practices, and their concerns for the future. Introduction interviews were used to build rapport, and gain a life-course understanding of participants' practices in public spaces (Andrews et al., 2013).
Next, participants took part in a go-along interview (between 45 and 180 min), where the participant gave the researcher a tour of their neighbourhood (Carpiano, 2009; Hand et al., 2017). This method has been used successfully with PLWD to reveal more about everyday life (Burton and Mitchell, 2006; Odzakovic et al., 2018). Then, two-week GPS tracking and travel diaries were used to ascertain participants' broader mobility patterns from a timescale perspective. The frequest destination from these methods were used to guide a second go-along interview – participants were instructed to take the researcher to this place from their home. It was designed to confirm the initial data collected by including a route the participant used regularly, as a way to ensure rigour (Baxter and Eyles, 1997). During all interviews, researcher

Table 1. Participant list.


chotomy between "control" and "protection" (Brannelly, 2016).
In this study, a care lens is combined with relational understandings of neighbourhoods to interrogate how PLWD adapt to their existing environments and (re)make their neighbourhoods into a place that is familiar and comfortable to them, how they care for themselves and
Pseudonym Participant,
Age at Time of Fieldwork
Condition
Causing Dementia Symptoms (Self-reported Diagnosis)
Neighbourhood
Typology (Based on Gordon et al., 2019)
Care
Partner
their loved ones through their everyday practices in public space, and how ephemeral encounters with human and more-than-human entities care for them. This research found that PLWD care for themselves by negotiating their environments, dealing with changes to their abilities, as well as with societal and internalized stigma, in addition to caring for others.

Methods

The research, part of a larger study, focused on the experiences of PLWD in suburban neighbourhoods, using a grounded theory approach (Biglieri, 2019; S. Biglieri, 2021a). Suburban neighbourhoods were selected because of the growing body of research noting how problem- atic automobile dependant places are for older adults in terms of lower social engagement and physical activity, when compared to walkable built environments (Ghani et al., 2018; Levasseur et al., 2015; Kerr et al.,
Don Male, 71 years

Lorraine Female, 81 years
George Male, 65 years

Douglas Male, 65 years

Alexander Male, 58 years
Violet Female, 57 years

Elizabeth Female, 56 years
Early onset Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's disease Early onset Alzheimer's disease Early onset Alzheimer's disease Parkinson's disease Early onset Alzheimer's disease Early onset Alzheimer's disease
Auto-Suburb Wife (Retired)

Auto-Suburb Husband (Retired)
Auto-Suburb Wife (Working)

Auto-Suburb Wife (Working)

Exurban Sister (Working)
Auto-Suburb Husband (Working)

Auto-Suburb Husband (Working)

SB was listening and observing participants' embodied and subjective experiences, their human and more-than-human encounters, and sense-scapes (incorporating sound, visual, olfactory, tactile experi- ences). Attention was also carefully paid to data on participants' per- sonal histories and sense of belonging in outdoor space (Tornaghi, 2015).
A grounded theory analytic approach was used, in which the in- terviews were transcribed and followed open, axial, and theoretical coding (Charmaz, 2014). Open coding involved examining transcrip- tions line-by-line and summarizing sections of text using active gerund-based phrases like "Expressing fear for the future", which allows the researcher to see processes and actions (Charmaz and Keller, 2016). Researcher SB used as much detail as possible in these codes to capture nuance and centre participants' voices and constructions of meaning (Charmaz, 2000, as cited in Mills et al., 2006). Focusing on actions, rather than themes, was an important part of this step (Charmaz, 2014). Memo-writing for each code was employed and used later in the analysis when investigating relationships between action codes (Charmaz, 2014). Through immersion in the over 1200 gerund-based action codes, SB interrogated and organized them into categories (axial coding). This categorization was then peer-checked and tested by researcher JD. Then SB built and tested the categories on the rest of the data during the theoretical coding phase by re-examining each open code to ensure it was in the correct category. These iterative steps involved rexamining relationships between different patterns and themes from the data, was again peer-checked by JD. During axial and theoretical coding stages, care emerged as an useful lens through which to interpret the data and resulted in three care-orientated themes.
Finally, beyond being used to ensure methodological rigour in
determining the second go-along interview final destinations, the GPS and Travel Diary data were used to support our qualitative findings, as elucidated through the grounded theory approach, about the impor- tance of relational experience within the participants' neighbourhoods. Rather than using these tools to extrapolate individual behaviour, we looked at them in aggregate to understand complex interdependent networks of relations between people and the built/natural environ- ments, which enable mobility of people living with dementia.

Findings

The findings shed light on the everyday care practices of PLWD in their suburban neighbourhoods, and we argue how these experiences shape/are shaped through time, and include relationships with human and more-than-human others.

Theme 1: self-care in place over time

Care through time along with considerations of temporality are in- tegral to socio-spatial relational experiences of the everyday for PLWD. Dementia, like many other chronic diseases, is episodic and fluid on a daily basis. It is also similar to other degenerative diseases with pro- gressive symptoms. Dementia was referred to by some participants as a "slow death", with the decline having an unpredictable nature and timing. Like George who said: "At some point I shouldn't be riding a bike…
Maybe progress so that wouldn't be safe and that will cut back a lot, and then
I suppose the bus will become more and more difficult… So all those will shrink." The temporal, changing nature of living with dementia and its impact on participants' future was a source of fear; however, many
discussed (often with humour) how they are caring for their future selves as their symptoms change. Interpreting the (re)produced famil- iarity of places over time using a care lens allows us to view history in a place as a caring act: past selves caring for present-day selves through the former's production of familiarity that is interpreted as supportive in the present.
Noticing frictions
The everyday lives of the participants were changing, and they were beginning to "notice frictions" between these changes and the world around them (Fleet, 2019). Many noted the impact that decline had on their memory, abilities, and sense of time, affecting their sense of self and ability to navigate their familiar neighbourhoods (Don, Douglas, Lorraine, Elizabeth). The most common and prominent change was the loss of their driver's license, which shrunk their life space in their car-centric neighbourhoods. Over half of the participants expressed a newfound fear of getting lost in unfamiliar places outside of their neighbourhood (Don, Douglas, Alexander, Elizabeth). Other partici- pants noticed the impact of their changing abilities on their experiences in public spaces, including impaired depth perception and risk analysis (e.g., when crossing a busy road) (Violet, Alexander, George), having to be "on alert", and being easily startled (Don, Violet). Some described how a feeling of panic (Elizabeth) and loss of confidence in oneself (Don) made walking around more difficult and almost prohibitive. Participants also noticed increased difficulty performing everyday activities and tasks in public, including riding a bike, gardening, grocery shopping, and walking.
All participants described the practice of walking on one's own as
being more difficult than before. Preparation for a walk was described as an involved task requiring participants to think in steps and motivation to get out of the house, which was sometimes lacking (George, Douglas, Don). Some talked about and expressed frustration about how their world was smaller than before because of their changing abilities (Lor- raine, Douglas, Elizabeth). Douglas blamed the built environment for being car-centric and lacking amenities within walking distance. George discussed the "mind tiredness" or exhaustion that comes from being socially engaged as much greater than before his diagnosis, resulting in self-limited interactions with others.

Present day self-care
Participants' routes were guided by comfort, but also by purpo-













ticipants discussing how winter limits to their mobility, due to lack of snow removal from sidewalks and discomfort in being cold. Participants also limited their own activity-space based on what was familiar, stating that they would not go beyond certain boundaries, take different buses, or go to other parts of the region by themselves, for fear of getting lost. This self-imposed boundary creation can be thought of as an act of self- care—reducing stress and fear. These examples of avoidance and self- imposed boundaries are examples of structural barriers in their subur- ban neighbourhoods – evidence these landscapes were not built to support their access.
Participants also demonstrated embodied tactics for negotiating these more stressful locations. Participants would become hyper- vigilant, and this was embodied in their speech and actions, often checking traffic multiple times. Violet spent considerable time breaking

down the steps for crossing a street: looking both ways twice, waiting for a car going 20 km/h to come to a complete stop, making eye contact,
preference for living in the present, along with strategies for planning for care in the future, can all be considered acts of self-care in place.
looking both ways again, and then stepping off the Other
research has indicated that PLWD's ability to negotiate several inputs of information at once is depleted (Brorsson et al., 2014); this participant adapted by ensuring every step was slow and methodical. Participants' lived experiences outdoors was also impacted by prescribed self-care recommendations from medical professionals. Don's doctor "pre- scribed" three physical activity sessions and three organized social groups per week, which encouraged him to get out and walk more. For Elizabeth, it was the opposite—after getting lost while on the bus (but then calling her husband and figuring out how to get home via bus again), her doctor recommended that she not walk alone. This had a serious impact on her outdoor life, and she lamented that she does not go outside often.

Planning for care in the future
Participants demonstrated how they care for their future selves in terms of their mobility and housing. On a go-along interview, George noted the congregate living facility that he wants to move to when he gets to "that stage", having selected it because of its proximity to a lively town square, coffee shops, library, and stone masonry buildings: "That
would be a nice, home where you still get out and see things". Don and his
care partner selected their current residence because of the dementia diagnosis, knowing that walking to amenities will make up for the (eventual) loss of a driver's license. For other participants, caring for their future selves was about figuring out new ways to be mobile now and to prepare for the future. Some participants discussed learning how to use public transportation (because of the loss of their driver's license), hoping they could learn before it was too late and not have to rely on
Theme 2: care interdependence in place

PLWD are frequently framed as dependant—on the healthcare sys- tem, their families/friends—by society and in a large majority of the literature. However, by understanding our findings through a lens of care, it emerged that the participants living with dementia have created an interdependent network to facilitate their mobility in addition to caring for others in their everyday outdoor practices in several diverse ways. Losing their ability to drive in their car-dependant suburbs greatly altered how participants interacted with their neighbourhoods, shrink- ing their activity space. They often had to learn how to navigate on foot and take public transportation. PLWD also created and relied on a complex interdependent mobility network, made up of walking (all participants) and solo public transport trips (Alexander, Lorraine, Eliz- abeth, George) and drives from family and friends. Using the two-week GPS and Travel Diary data, we can see the variation in participants' activity space based on solo trips (mostly on foot or by public transit) versus trips facilitated by family and friends (mostly by car). Trips facilitated by family and friends significantly enlarged each partici- pant's activity space (see Fig. 1). While one might think of solo trips as the ultimate in understanding mobility, a care lens and focus on adap- tation highlights the importance of how the individual (often with their partner) has built up a care network of family and friends to facilitate their mobility. Participants travelled on their own but also relied on partners, place of worship friends, exercise buddies, children, para- transit, and carpooling in various combinations to take them to and from
others to drive them places (Lorraine, Elizabeth, George, Alexander).
Participants also revealed how they care for
in their everyday
Others prepared for the future by looking into (George, Violet, Elizabeth, Alexander).
vehicles
practices. This included caring for neighbours through purchasing gro- ceries and facilitating their mobility by having their partners drive them
Another strategy was
in one's neighbourhood to
places (Lorraine), shovelling snow for older neighbours (Douglas), and a
create habits and memories of their local environment, in addition to staying physically active to protect oneself against the progression of dementia symptoms (Don). Douglas does a daily walking loop with his two dogs as a way to prepare himself in case he gets lost; his rationale being that the dogs will know the way home, and his wife will know where he is because it is his daily habit: "But it is like I have to have a habit. If I want to walk, I have got to make sure I remember that walk all the time". Similarly, Don discussed "keeping the cobwebs off" of the little box that is in his head of his neighbourhood by going out regularly for walks in it. All participants engaged in some form of habitual walking (as evidenced by their GPS tracking), ranging from once a week to once a day. This suggests that either consciously or subconsciously, participants understood the importance of continuous embodied knowledge to maintain mobility in their neighbourhoods. Other participants turned to a range of technological solutions to adapt their present (and future) experiences in public spaces. This included using smartphones with GPS directions and bus schedules (George)), considering wearing a medical alert bracelet (Lorraine), educating themselves (PLWD and care part-
general sense of "looking out for one another" in the community (Don). Participants often lived close to children or siblings and would make a point of visiting them or, at least, passing by their house and/or place of work (Don, Alexander, George). Many participants cared for their partners by doing errands during the day (while their partner was at work), like buying groceries/snacks and walking the dogs (Lorraine, Violet, Douglas). Douglas cared for his wife by not veering off his daily walking route so that she would always know where he was, and Alexander promised to wear reflective gear to make him more visible to cars. All participants but one expressed care for others by carrying a cell phone when they went outdoors. George cared for his partner by going for walks and taking part in a hiking group together. Douglas restricted nighttime outdoor activities to spend more time with his partner, and Lorraine expressed care by encouraging her partner to get outside. Douglas cared deeply about the safety and comfort of his dogs, designing an easy-to-remember walking loop that prioritized shade, away from busy roads and coyotes. Participants also worried about the state of the built environment for others, through expressing concerns for children
ners) about dementia (Lorraine, Douglas), and keeping detailed phone contact lists with photos of individuals at different ages (George). These
and women's safety near regarding
roads (Don, Douglas) and for older adults sidewalks (Lorraine). Lorraine took it upon
care strategies were to support their future selves.
Finally, some participants did not want to talk about the future, preferring to live in the moment (Violet), or expressed pessimism about the future: "When the Alzheimer's gets me to the point where I don't know where I'm going—then I shouldn't be going anyway. Without somebody on
your arm, or a long chain and a buckle" (Don). This negative perspective
can be interpreted as the participant being realistic, understanding that they may need to be more interdependent in the future. Or we can read them as experiencing internalized ableism in which they believe that their disabilities will become so "bad" that they deserve to have their mobility restricted, rather than questioning why the environments around them are not made to accommodate those disabilities. The
herself to write notes for homeowners/businesses when they did not clear snow from their sidewalks as an act for both herself and the community.

Theme 3: encounter as care

This final theme departs from the previous because it documents how PLWD feel cared for in their neighbourhoods through encounters with human and more-than-human others. During the go-along interviews, all participants said hello to at least one stranger, sometimes chatting about mundane things, after which they seemed more cheerful. Some participants also described enjoying the great cultural and social events



Fig. 1.. Mobility Vignette – Douglas: Going out on one's own (walking) vs. Drawing on others (driving).

in their neighbourhoods (Alexander, George). Human encounters in
were also sought by participants. This included going to caf´es where the staff and other patrons were friendly and welcoming (Don, Elizabeth), taking transit when a bus driver says hello and waits until you are seated before moving (Alexander), and
Participants also sought encounters with more-than-humans, including flora, objects, and fauna.
pass special gardens and areas with a large tree canopy (Elizabeth, Lorraine, Don, George). During the go-along, Elizabeth stopped to look at the "little library" in front of a person's home, and upon taking the
visiting
(i.e., a seniors' community centre,
time to borrow a book, exclaimed what a wonderful experience it was.
pharmacy) because the staff recognize them (George, Alexander). En- counters with neighbours and acquaintances were also a key component of the caring encounters experienced by participants:
"There's a lot of nice, lot of people out. Older than me and younger than me that they're walking their dogs or their kids and I get to say hello to somebody. That's a human. I do talk to my dogs, but they don't tell me anything back. Good listeners." (Douglas)
Some participants lamented that they did not know their neighbours well and wished they saw people out more often. Many talked about visiting friends/family and going out with these folks to parks, com- munity centres, caf´es, and places of worship. Participants always mentioned the role of the support group in their lives and the diverse destinations they have visited with them.
The fauna included participants' own pets, who motivated some to get outside (Douglas, George), as well other people's pets they encountered (stopping to say hello to friendly dogs), nesting birds, and ducks on a pond and in a river. When these kinds of encounters are combined with participants' human encounters, they form an important complex network of feeling cared for, caring for others and being connected to one's community.

Discussion

Scholars utilizing relational theory stress the need to understand people as fluid beings, with relationships and abilities that change over time. PLWD are constantly experiencing change in their abilities and sense of self, and they reflect on this in terms of their recent past and

present. When participants notice frictions (Fleet, 2019) and adapt (or not) their "daily body rhythms" (Bowlby, 2012) in outdoor practices, this can be considered an act of self-care (or lack thereof). By viewing these acts through a relational care lens (through combining the two approaches of relationality in neighbourhoods and a care lens), it can then give insight into structural barriers in the participants'suburban neighbourhoods (e.g. car required to access amenities due to single use zoning, unsafe streets and crossings that prioritize cars over pedestrians, etc.). Participants' changing experiences and abilities over time show how their suburban landscapes have become increasingly inaccessible to them, especially following the loss of their driver's license.
PLWD in this study have (re)made themselves and changed their interactions with their surroundings to make them more accessible. They have done this through practices of caring for oneself in the past, present, and future. Participants have mostly chosen to live in a place that is familiar to them, based on their past, be it through living in the same place for 30 years, or through moving to a location with familiar architecture. In the present, PLWD have engaged in self-care by limiting activity space to what is familiar, selecting certain routes to avoid stressful streets, and altering their actions in public space to be more careful since diagnosis. Familiarity as limiting to participation in neighbourhoods is congruent with research in Sweden (Margot-Cattin et al., 2021), and participants taking measures to ensure that they are walking in comfortable places aligns with other relational walking behaviour research with adults (Dean et al., 2020) and PLWD (Ward et al., 2018). Self-care was also exemplified through participants' modified daily practices in preparation for the inevitable decline in future. This includes daily habitual walking practices or selecting a future supportive living facility for its proximity to a familiar, preferred location. These acts of past, present, and future self-care in space tells us about the structural barriers of poor urban design and land use policy, but also shows us how innovative PLWD are in how they negotiate these suburban environments.
There is a need to think about how to learn about these innovative
practices, and how to build on them to enable movement as practi- tioners. Other research has found that self-care practices open up spaces of interaction and encounter (Rosa, 2019), which is also true for PLWD—when they can go outside, they are more likely to encounter others and thus feel included. A further dimension that impacted the self-care practices of PLWD in this study were common societal con- ceptions of dementia as a tragic, inevitable decline in which one should disengage from society (Mitchell et al., 2013; Swaffer, 2015). This was clear in two ways, first through "prescribed self-care practices" in public spaces by a physician, through the dichotomous examples provided (from recommending walks outside to stating the participant should never go out alone), and the power of a medical professional in dictating how to care for oneself in terms of outdoor activity. This demonstrates a need for physicians to be educated on ways to balance safety with continued inclusion and engagement in public spaces to avoid perpet- uating stigma. The second way in which societal conceptions impacted the self-care practices of PLWD can be seen in how some participants preferred to live in the present (instead of thinking about the future) and conceived of their future selves negatively, suggesting internalized ableism. PLWD are well-aware of dominant negative discourse sur- rounding dementia, and it influences their practices in terms of caring for themselves in the present and future. This speaks to the need to address broader socio-cultural-political relations to not only make PLWD feel like they belong in society, but to support their inclusion in public spaces across the dementia journey (Kontos et al., 2018).
A relational care lens challenges the narrative of PLWD's dependency
by understanding their experiences with human and more-than-human others as interdependence in place. A care lens perceives mobility as a complex relational network and explains how family and friends care by supporting the inclusion of the PLWD in the community by aiding their mobility. Another way to interpret this finding—from a perspective that incorporates the spatial component—is that PLWD's reliance on others
for rides might only exist because of the car-dependant built environ- ments in which these participants live. However, by understanding PLWD's adaptive tactics we unpack the messy nature of everyday life-
—many people rely on multiple transport modes and diverse supports and socio-spatial care relations through which they access public spaces. Further, this paper demonstrated how PLWD care for others in everyday spaces, confronting hegemonic conceptions of dependency perpetrated by media and academic research. Confronting this hegemonic miscon- ception could combat stigma and challenge the undervaluing of inter- dependence in society. The documentation of PLWD's innovative practices challenges (and highlights) the direct impact stigmatization has on their mobility and society's perceptions of the design of suburban neighbourhoods more generally. This research demonstrates how en- counters in public space are a form of care. All participants highlighted the importance of greeting people when outside as well as felt joy from seemingly mundane encounters, echoing Ward et al. (2018)'s findings that fleeting, ephemeral encounters enhance PLWD's sense of inclusion in the neighbourhood.
Work in disciplines like bioethics have called for thinking of de- mentia as an ecology that "arises from the interaction between neuro- pathological change, people, language and meaning," (Chapman et al., 2019). This networked and systematic understanding of complex in- teractions is supported this empirical work, however, this work goes beyond by identifying multi-scalar and multi-temporal relations as "careful" or "careless" (a moral judgement) - as a way to encourage action at all scales and by interdisciplinary practitioners. This kind of lens could be used to help build truly dementia-inclusive communities by identifying the complex multi-scalar and multi-temporal relation- alities and place impacts on wellbeing, and then working across disci- plines and sectors to address contextual needs. For instance, engaging with people living with dementia within a single neighbourhood by asking them about their experiences and working with professionals to develop actions for a context-specific dementia-inclusive community plan. An example - if the community decided to focus on wayfinding for PLWD, one could conduct research in the three theme areas to identify relations between humans, more-than-human others, built environ- ments, policies, programs and broader socio-cultural political structures through time as 'careful' or 'careless'. This would inform the plan, and you would use that to engage with multiple professions and community members. Below is an example of what this could look like:

Self care in place over time – understand how PLWD have cared for themselves in the past - what produces familiarity for them and work to protect/augment identified landmarks for continued mobility. Understand how people living with dementia care for themselves in the present to identify inaccessible streetscapes, parking lots, street crossings that cause them anxiety and exacerbate their symptoms, leading to overwhelm and decreased cognitive capacity. Then, engage transportation engineers and planners to rewrite policies and standards for these locations. Finally, understand how people are planning for the future – and work with them to help augment this process, like establishing a program to learn how to take public transport, how to identify dementia-trained shopkeepers or how to contact the police.
Care interdependence in place – understand interdependent care networks of mobility and work with public transportation author- ities, transit drivers, paratransit, active transportation planners on how to improve journeys with PLWD. This could include improved infrastructure, accessible signage that is based on PLWD' needs, and/ or training these professions.
Encounter as care – understand how relations with humans and more-than-human others (flora, fauna) influence people living with dementia's wayfinding in their neighbourhood. Then, could work with PLWD and their families to train neighbourhood associations, businesses and community members on how to interact with PLWD

particularly if they are lost, and encourage individual homeowners to post wayfinding signage.

This relational care lens can help to identify inaccessible built en- vironments (like stressful streets built for cars that prevent people with dementia from walking on them and limiting their mobility) and inno- vative practices people with dementia already do (like using medians to avoid being overwhelmed by signalized crossings) that can be used to guide built environment practitioners. A care lens can help practitioners understand how people create interdependent networks of mobility, disrupting typical deterministic transportation research that focuses on one type of trip – commuting. It also tells us about the power of small encounters, something that planners have begun to realize influences walking routes (Dean et al., 2020). Finally, a care lens can show how spatial practices are affected by socio-cultural-political structures, like structures of ableism and ageism propagated by professionals and so- ciety negatively impacting a person living with dementia's ability to go outside (Biglieri, 2021b). Finally, this relational care lens could also address recent calls to 'build back better' after the COVID-19 pandemic and move beyond popular urbanist discussions of the 15-minute city to focus on the complex experiences of the most affected – those at the social, spatial and institutional peripheries – and to help develop multi-scalar, multi-temporal place-based interventions (Biglieri et al., 2020).

Conclusion

This paper makes two main contributions - first, the empirical find- ings from this research support existing literature on PLWD's lived ex- periences in neighbourhoods, acknowledging the existence of dynamic socio-spatial relations that are (re)negotiated over time as residents' needs and abilities change (Li et al., 2021; Odzakovic et al., 2021; Ward et al., 2021; 2018; Clark et al., 2020). Second, we argue that a relational care lens requires that we not treat these social-spatial relations as neutral, but rather make judgements about the nature of the relation as careful or careless. In doing so, we acknowledge that we have a re- sponsibility for the wellbeing of others in the community, and are all simultaneously vulnerable when that care is absent (Rosa, 2019). With respect to the built environment, our findings call for practitioners to consider not just the practical aspects of neighbourhood design and in- teractions for PLWD, but the moral value of those multi-scalar, multi-- temporal relations. The research also adds to the geographies of care literature by expanding through scale to study the neighbourhood, but also focusing on socio-spatial relationships at the most personal level (i. e., self-care practices) to the societal level (i.e., how perceptions of stigma impact the everyday practices of PLWD) over time (by examining the past, present, and future). It also aligns with work using relationality to disrupt the traditional, environmentally deterministic understandings of neighbourhoods – in particular disrupting an understanding of everyday life in the suburbs as monolithic, timeless and socially disconnected (Keil, 2018). This relational care lens and empirical work interrupts these notions by identifying seemingly ordinary relations between humans, more-than-human others, built environments, and socio-cultural-political structures as careful/careless. It demonstrates the dynamic interplay of impairment, embodiment, and social and structural barriers over time (Keil, 2018), and contributes to the larger project of theorizing suburban space in terms of everyday life and socio-spatial supports for and barriers to wellbeing for vulnerable pop- ulations (Lo et al., 2015).
This perspective of care has allowed us to reject the dichotomous
question of "Who cares for whom?", assuming care is unidirectional, and instead ask, "How does one (do we) care(s)?", examining multipicitous relations at all scales (Rosa, 2019). By answering the latter, this research has interrogated how people adapt to their existing environments and (re)make their neighbourhoods into places that are familiar and comfortable to them. It demonstrates how they care for themselves and
their loved ones through their practices, and how ephemeral encounters with human and more-than-human entities care by supporting PLWD's inclusion in neighbourhoods. The complex interdependent networks of care described here are theorized to be supportive in various ways and along a spectrum, suggesting that suburban neighbourhoods are not universally careless. Rather, these places and their systems of encounter and impact on everyday practices can be simultaneously caring and careless in diverse ways, like in certain locations, through different embodiments in space, and changing abilities and perceptions through time.
A socio-spatial relational care lens reveals the dynamic, messy interplay between people and place, and human and more-than-human materialities through time. Thinking of these relationships through a care lens balances human agency and self-care practices, relationships with human and more-than-human, understanding power structures (like stigma and internalized ableism) and the built environment, while also being sensitive to time space. This research shows how using a socio-spatial relational care lens could lead toward more nuanced, contextual understandings of place and its impacts on wellbeing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References

Amin, A., 2012. Land of Strangers. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Andrews, G.J., Evans, J., Wiles, J.L., 2013. Re-spacing and re-placing gerontology: relationality and affect. Ageing Soc. 33 (8), 1339–1373. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0144686X12000621.
Bartlett, R., Brannelly, T., 2019. On being outdoors: how people with dementia experience and deal with vulnerabilities. Soc. Sci. Med. 235 https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.05.041.
Baxter, Jamie, Eyles, John, 1997. Evaluating Qualitative Research in Social Geography: establishing 'rigour' in Interview Analysis. Trans. Inst. Br. Geograph. 22 (4),
505–525.
Biglieri, S., 2018. Implementing Dementia-Friendly Land Use Planning: an Evaluation of Current Literature and Financial Implications for Greenfield Development in Suburban Canada. Plan. Pract. Res. 33 (3), 264–290. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02697459.2017.1379336.
Biglieri, S., 2019. Planning Dementia-Inclusive Suburban Neighbourhoods. University of Waterloo [Doctoral Dissertation,]. UWSpace.
Biglieri, S., De Vidovich, L., Keil, R., 2020. City as the core of contagion? Repositioning COVID-19 at the social and spatial periphery of urban society. Cities & Health 1–3.
Biglieri, S., 2021a. The Right to (Re)Shape the City: examining the Accessibility of a Public Engagement Tool for People Living With Dementia. J. Am. Plann. Assoc. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944363.2020.1852100.
Biglieri, S., 2021b. Examining Everyday Outdoor Practices in Suburban Public Space: the case for an Expanded Definition of Care as an Analytical Framework. In:
Gabauer, Angelika, Knierbein, Sabine, Cohen, Nir, Lebuhn, Henrik, Trogal, Kim, Viderman, Tihomir (Eds.), Care and the City: Encounters with Urban Studies.
Routledge, New York and London. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003031536-9 (1st Ed., p. 88-99).
Blackman, T.I.M, Mitchell, L, Burton, E, Jenks, M, Parsons, M, Raman, S, Williams, K, 2003. The accessibility of public spaces for people with dementia: A new priority for the'open city. Disability & Society 18 (3), 357–371.
Bowlby, S., 2012. Recognising the Time—Space Dimensions of Care: caringscapes and Carescapes. Environ. Plan. A Economy and Space 44 (9), 2101–2118. https://doi. org/10.1068/a44492.
Brannelly, T., 2016. Citizenship and people living with dementia: a case for the ethics of care. Dementia 15 (3), 304–314. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301216639463.
Brittain, K., Corner, L., Robinson, L., Bond, J., 2010. Ageing in place and technologies of place: the lived experience of people with dementia in changing social, physical and technological environments. Sociol. Health Illn. 32 (2), 272–287.
Brorsson, Anna, O¨ hman, Annika, Cutchin, Malcolm, Nygård, Louise, 2013. Managing
Critical Incidents in Grocery Shopping by Community-Living People with Alzheimer's Disease. Scand. J. Occup. Ther. 20 (4), 292–301.
Brorsson, A., Ohman, A., Lundberg, S., Nygard, L., 2014. Being a pedestrian with dementia: a qualitative study using photo documentation and focus group interviews. Dementia. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301214555406.
Brorsson, A., O¨ hman, A., Lundberg, S., Nygård, L., 2011. Accessibility in public space as
perceived by people with Alzheimer's disease. Dementia 10 (4), 587–602. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1471301211415314.
Burton, E., Mitchell, L., 2006. Inclusive Urban design: Streets for Life. Elsevier, New York, NY.

Campbell, S., Clark, A., Keady, J., Kullberg, A., Manji, K., Rummery, K., Ward, R., 2019. Participatory social network map making with family carers of people living with dementia. Methodol. Innov. 12 (1), 205979911984444 https://doi.org/10.1177/
2059799119844445.
Carpiano, R.M., 2009. Come take a walk with me: the "Go-Along" interview as a novel method for studying the implications of place for health and well-being. Health Place 15 (1), 263–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.HEALTHPLACE.2008.05.003.
Chapman, M., Philip, J., Komesaroff, P., 2019. Towards an ecology of dementia: a manifesto. J. Bioeth. Inq. 16 (2), 209–216.
Charmaz, K., 2014. Constructing Grounded Theory, 2nd ed. SAGE Publications Inc, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Charmaz, K., Keller, R, 2016. A Personal Journey with Grounded Theory Methodology: kathy Charmaz in Conversation With Reiner Keller. Forum Qual. Sozialforschung/ Forum Qual. Soc. Res. 17 (1), 27. https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs-17.1.2541.
Clark, A., Campbell, S., Keady, J., Kullberg, A., Manji, K., Rummery, K., Ward, R., 2020. Neighbourhoods as relational places for people living with dementia. Soc. Sci. Med. 252 (March), 112927 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.112927.
Clarke, P.J., Ailshire, J.A., House, J.S., Morenoff, J.D., King, K., Melendez, R., Langa, K. M., 2012. Cognitive function in the community setting: the neighbourhood as a source of 'cognitive reserve'? J. Epidemiol. Commun. Health 66 (8), 730–736.
Clarke, P., Weuve, J., Barnes, L., Evans, D., Mendes de Leon, C., 2015. Cognitive decline and the neighbourhood environment. Ann. Epidemiol. 25, 849–854.
Corburn, J., 2009. Toward the Healthy city: people, places, and the Politics of Urban Planning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cummins, S., Curtis, S., Diez-Roux, A.V., Macintyre, S., 2007. Understanding and representing "place" in health research: a relational approach. Soc. Sci. Med. 65 (9), 1825–1838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2007.05.036.
Curtis, S., Congdon, P., Atkinson, S., Corcoran, R., MaGuire, R., Peasgood, T., 2020.
Adverse conditions for wellbeing at the neighbourhood scale in England: potential and challenges for operationalising indicators relevant to wellbeing in and of places. Wellbeing, Space and Society 1 (November), 100009. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wss.2020.100009.
Dean, J., Biglieri, S., Drescher, M., Garnett, A., Glover, T., Casello, J., 2020. Thinking relationally about built environments and walkability: a study of adult walking behavior in Waterloo, Ontario. Health Place 64, 102352.
Duggan, S., Blackman, T., Martyr, A., & Van Schaik, P. (2008). The impact of early dementia on outdoor life: a 'shrinking world'? https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1471301208091158.
Fisher, B., Tronto, J.C., 1990. Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring. In: Abel, E.K., Nelson, M.K. (Eds.), Circles of Care: Work and Identity in Women's Lives. State University of New York Press, Albany, New York, pp. 35–62.
Fleet, C., 2019. Digital Frictions in Nonvisual Accessibility and the Built Environment. In: Paper presented at the #A11yIRL Conference, #A11yIRL. Toronto, 23 October.
Fleming, R., Bennett, K., Preece, T., Phillipson, L., 2017. The development and testing of the dementia friendly communities environment assessment tool (DFC EAT). Int. Psychogeriatr. 29 (2), 303–311.
Gan, D., Chaudhury, H., Mann, J., Wister, A., 2021. Dementia-friendly neighbourhood and the built environment: a scoping review. Gerontologist 1–18. https://academic. oup.com/gerontologist/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/geront/gnab019/61 31982.
Ghani, F., Rachele, J.N., Loh, H.Y., Washington, S., Turrell, G., 2018. Do differences in built environments explain age differences in transport walking across neighbourhoods? J. Transp. Health 9, 83–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jth.2018.03.010.
Goodley, D., Lawthom, R., Liddiard, K., Runswick-Cole, K., 2019. Provocations for Critical Disability Studies. Disability and Society 34 (6), 972–997. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/09687599.2019.1566889.
Gordon, D., Willms, C. and Hindrichs, L. (2019) Kitchener-Waterloo-Cambridge: transportation T9 Method [Online]. Queen's School of Urban and Regional Planning. Available at http://canadiansuburbs.ca/files/Kitchener_T9_2016.pdf [Accessed 16 October 2019].
Hall, E., Wilton, R., 2017. Towards a relational geography of disability. Prog. Hum.
Geogr. 41 (6), 727–744. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132516659705.
Hand, C., Huot, S., Rudman, D.L., Wijekoon, S., 2017. Qualitative-Geospatial Methods of Exploring Person-Place Transactions in Aging Adults: a Scoping Review.
Gerontologist 57 (3), 47–61. https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnw130.
Hand, C.L., Laliberte Rudman, D., Huot, S., Gilliland, J.A., Pack, R., 2018. Toward Understanding Person–Place Transactions in Neighborhoods: a Qualitative- Participatory Geospatial Approach. Gerontologist 58 (1), 89–100.
Hopkins, R, 2010. Dementia Projections for the Counties, Regional Municipalities, and Census Divisions of Ontario (Using CHSA Prevalence Data). Geriatric Psychiatry Programme - Clinical/Research Bulletin. https://providencecare.ca/wp-co ntent/uploads/2016/10/Ontario-Dementia-Projections-2010.pdf.
Imrie, R., Kullman, K., 2017. Designing with Care and Caring with Design. In: Bates, C., Imrie, R., Kullman, K. (Eds.), Care and Design: Bodies, Buildings, Cities. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, West Sussex, United Kingdom (1st ed., pp. 1–15).
Jones, R., 2019. Really shit work? Bodily becoming and the capacity to care for the urban forest. Soc. Cult. Geogr. 20 (5), 630–648. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14649365.2017.1384046.
Keil, R., 2018. Suburban Planet: Making the World Urban from the Outside in. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Kerr, J., Rosenberg, D., Frank, L., 2012. The Role of the Built Environment in Healthy Aging: community Design, Physical Activity, and Health among Older Adults.
J. Plan. Lit. 27 (1), 43–60. https://doi.org/10.1177/0885412211415283.
Keyes, S.E., Webber, S.H., Beveridge, K., 2015. Empowerment through care: using dialogue between the social model of disability and an ethic of care to redraw
boundaries of independence and partnership between disabled people and services. Alter 9 (3), 236–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alter.2015.05.002.
Keyes, S.E., Clarke, C.L., Gibb, C.E., 2019. Living with dementia, interdependence and citizenship: narratives of everyday decision-making. Disabil. Soc. 34 (2), 296–319. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2018.1528970.
Kontos, P., Miller, K., Kontos, A.P., 2017. Relational citizenship : supporting embodied selfhood and relationality in dementia care. Sociol. Health and Illness 39 (2), 182–198. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9566.12453.
Kontos, P., Grigorovich, A., Dupuis, S., Jonas-Simpson, C., Mitchell, G., Gray, J., 2018. Raising the curtain on stigma associated with dementia: fostering a new cultural imaginary for a more inclusive society. Crit. Public Health 1–13. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/09581596.2018.1508822.
Lawson, V., 2007. Presidential Address: geographies of Care and Responsibility. Ann.
Assoc. Am. Geograph. 97 (1), 1–11.
Lawson, V., 2008. Geographies of Care and Responsibility. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geograph. 97 (1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.2007.00520.x.
Lee, E., Dean, J., 2018. Perceptions of walkability and determinants of walking behaviour among urban seniors in Toronto, Canada. J. Transp. Health 9, 309–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2018.03.004.
Lefebvre, H., 1996. Writings On Cities. Blackwell, Oxford, UK (E. Koffman & E. Lebas, Trans.).
Levasseur, M., G´en´ereux, M., Bruneau, J.-.F., Vanasse, A., Chabot, E´., Beaulac, C.,
B´edard, M.-.M., 2015. Importance of proximity to resources, social support, transportation and neighborhood security for mobility and social participation in older adults: results from a scoping study. BMC Public Health 15 (1), 503. https:// doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1824-0.
Li, X., Keady, J., Ward, R., 2021. Transforming lived places into the connected neighbourhood: a longitudinal narrative study of five couples where one partner has an early diagnosis of dementia. Age. Soc. 41 (3), 605–627.
Lloyd, B.T., Stirling, C., 2015. The will to mobility: life-space satisfaction and distress in people with dementia who live alone. Age. Soc. 35 (09), 1801–1820.
Lo, P.C.L., Anisef, P., Wang, S., Preston, V.A., Basu, R., Wang, S., 2015. Social Infrastructure and Vulnerability in the Suburbs. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Macdonald, G., 2018. Why 'person-centred'care is not enough: a relational approach to dementia. Dementia As Social Experience, pp. 195–214. Routledge.
Margot-Cattin, I., Kühne, N., O¨ hman, A., Brorsson, A., Nygard, L., 2021. Familiarity and
participation outside home for persons living with dementia. Dementia, 14713012211002030.
Mills, J., Bonner, A., Francis, K., 2006. The Development of Constructivist Grounded Theory. Int. J. Qual. Methods 5 (1), 25–35. https://doi.org/10.1177/
160940690600500103.
Mitchell, G., Dupuis, S., Kontos, P., 2013. Dementia Discourse: from Imposed Suffering to Knowing Other-Wise. J. Appl. Hermeneut. 0 (2).
Neubauer, N.A., Azad-Khaneghah, P., Miguel-Cruz, A., Liu, L., 2018. What do we know about strategies to manage dementia-related wandering? A scoping review.
Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring 10, 615–628. O'Connor, D., Phinney, A., Smith, A., Small, J., Purves, B., Perry, J., Beattie, L., 2007.
Personhood in dementia care: developing a research agenda for broadening the vision. Dementia 6 (1), 121–142. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301207075648.
Odzakovic, E., Hellstrom, I., Ward, R., Kullberg, A., 2018. Overjoyed that I can go outside": using walking interviews to learn about the lived experience and meaning of neighbourhood for people living with dementia. Dementia 0 (0), 1–21. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1471301218817453.
Odzakovic, E., Kullberg, A., Hellstro¨m, I., Clark, A., Campbell, S., Manji, K., Ward, R.,
2021. It's our pleasure, we count cars here': an exploration of the 'neighbourhood- based connections' for people living alone with dementia. Age. Soc. 41 (3), 645–670.
Phillipson, L., & Hammond, A. (2018). More Than Talking: a Scoping Review of Innovative Approaches to Qualitative Research Involving People With Dementia. Https://Doi.Org/10.1177/1609406918782784, 17(1), 160940691878278. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1609406918782784.
Power, A., Bell, S.L., Kyle, R.G., Andrews, G.J., May 2018. 'Hopeful adaptation' in health geographies: seeking health and wellbeing in times of adversity. Soc. Sci. Med. 231, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.09.021.
Rosa, E., 2019. Why self-care matters for Roma people and beyond. Vulnerability and the (un)making of water and sanitation infrastructure at the margins of the city.
Geoforum 101, 192–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.02.008.
Shakespeare, T., Zeilig, H., Mittler, P., 2017. Rights in mind: thinking differently about dementia and disability. Dementia 0 (0), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1471301217701506.
Shoval, N., Wahl, H.W., Auslander, G., Isaacson, M., Oswald, F., Edry, T., Heinik, J., 2011. Use of the global positioning system to measure the out-of-home mobility of older adults with differing cognitive functioning. Ageing Soc 31 (5), 849–869. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X10001455.
Skinner, M.W., Cloutier, D., Andrews, G.J., 2015. Geographies of ageing: progress and possibilities after two decades of change. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 39 (6), 776–799. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132514558444.
Soja, E., 1996. Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real-And-Imagined Places.
Blackwell Publishing, Madden, MA.
Sturge, J., Nordin, S., Patil, D.S., Jones, A., L´egar´e, F., Elf, M., Meijering, L., 2021. Features of the social and built environment that contribute to the well-being of people with dementia who live at home: a scoping review. Health Place 67, 102483.
Swaffer, K., 2015. Dementia and Prescribed Disengagement(TM). Dementia 14 (1), 6. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471301214548136.
Tornaghi, C, 2015. The relational ontology of public space and action-oriented pedagogy in action - Dilemmas of professional ethics and social justice. In: Tornaghi, C.,

Knierbein, S. (Eds.), Public Space and Relational Perspectives: New Challenges For Architecture and Planning. Routledge, Oxfordshire, UK, 1st ed., pp. 17–42.
Ward, R., Clark, A., Campbell, S., Graham, B., Kullberg, A., Manji, K., Keady, J., 2018. The lived neighborhood: understanding how people with dementia engage with their local environment. Int. Psychogeriatr. 30 (6), 867–880. https://doi.org/10.1017/ S1041610217000631.
Ward, R., Rummery, K., Odzakovic, E., Manji, K., Kullberg, A., Keady, J., Campbell, S., 2021. Beyond the shrinking world: dementia, localisation and neighbourhood. Age. Soc. 1–22.
Williams, M.J., 2017. Care-full Justice in the City. Antipode 49 (3), 821–839. https://doi. org/10.1111/anti.12279.
World Health Organization, 2017. Global Action Plan On the Public Health Response to Dementia 2017-2025. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from. http://apps.who.int/b ookorders.