2022 ,((( &DOFXWWD &RQIHUHQFH (&$/&21)
Design of a Raspberry Pi Based Electronic Travel Assistant for Visually Impaired Persons

Amrita Thapa Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering Tripura Institute of Technology
Narsingarh, Tripura, India email: amritathapa1998@gmail.com
Sutapa Debbarma Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering Tripura Institute of Technology
Narsingarh, Tripura, India email: sutapa.debbarma@gmail.com
Bijoy Kumar Upadhyaya, MIEEE Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering Tripura Institute of Technology Narsingarh, Tripura, India
email: bku@ieee.org

Abstract— Technology aims to ease human life, helps to do the daily work with minimal effort. This become more important for the humans with disability such as visually impaired people. Visually impaired people face various difficulties to perform their day to day routine work unlike people with good vision. In this paper, an effort has been made to help visually impaired people by developing an electronic walking assistant to make their life easier. The proposed system consists of a Raspberry pi board, three ultrasonic sensors and a wet floor sensor embedded in a walking stick which helps the visually impaired person to walk without a live companion and guides during navigation. The ultrasonic sensors are used to detect obstacles if any in the path of the user and also to find any surface unevenness such as potholes and bumps, to avoid any kind of incident. A water detection module is designed and attached to the lower end of the stick to detect the wet surface. To alert the user about hindrances ahead of him/her, a buzzer and a vibration motor are attached to the stick. Test results of successful implementation of the device are also presented in detail. Error analysis and comparative study with other similar works have also been presented.
Keywords— Potholes, ultrasonic sensor, Raspberry Pi, visually impaired person

Introduction
Blindness is a curse to any human being which causes them unable to see and live a normal life without external help. As we can search the number worldwide, there are at least 2.2 billion people with impaired vision among which nearly 62 million are Indians [1]. In India, there are approximately 4,775 accidents in 2019 and 3564 accidents in 2020 were reported due to bad condition of roads by the ministry of road transport and highways [2]. The visually impaired people face many difficulties to walk around in their surroundings without any kind of help and are forced to take external support of animal or human companions. Hence their movement is not independent. To solve this problem to a large extent and to help the visually impaired person to move all by themselves independently, we have designed a hardware-based electronic travel assistant, which alerts them whenever they come across any kind of hindrances ahead of them.
Normally blind people use a white cane or a walking stick to support them while walking, but that is not sufficient in every condition. The white cane does not detect all kinds of obstacles in front of them or inform the user about the unevenness of the road or about the ground surface condition. So, in this work, we proposed to fill the loophole of a white cane by adding suitable sensors and

This research work is supported by AICTE, New Delhi under RPS- NER grant (8-25/FDC/RPS (NER)/POLICY-1/2020-21)

978-1-6654-6242-6/22/$31.00 2022 ,(((
processor to the stick. The proposed assistive device is powered by a Raspberry pi single board computer (SBC) and is capable of detecting obstacles and potholes/bumps in the forward path of the user. The system used ultrasonic sensors for the detection of obstacles and potholes/bumps and inform the user using a vibration motor. The intensity of vibration of the motor is inversely proportional to the distance of the obstacle or pothole, i.e. closer the object, the higher the intensity of vibration. The proposed gadget is equipped with a wet surface detection mechanism as well which can alert the user using a buzzer and prevent him/her from falling down.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief literature survey on works related to obstacle and pothole detection. In Section III, an overview of the proposed system has been described. A brief description of the components used in developing the prototype has been presented in Section IV. The working principle of the proposed device in connection with obstacle detection, pothole and bump identification and wet surface localization have been discussed in Section V. In Section VI, the results of the experimentation have been presented and analyzed. Concluding remarks are made in Section VII.
Related Work
There are some works available in the literature which demonstrate the development of various types of walking aids for the blind people. But there are very few works that detect the obstacle as well as surface unevenness like potholes and bumps together to help the visually impaired person more accurately during navigation. Few such works are reviewed below.
A PIC microcontroller, 16F77A based smart blind stick has been developed by Dey et al. [3] which employed three ultrasonic sensors as the input devices and a buzzer as the output device. The three sensors are placed in such a manner so that the stick provides wide coverage in horizontal direction. The system is capable of obstacle detection in the range of 5-35cm. Similar smart stick based on MSP 430 microcontroller has been proposed by Agarwal et al. [4] which is capable of detecting obstacle like pebbles, pits, rocks etc. using ultrasonic sensor. The stick has a water sensor and a RF module to locate the device when misplaced. Though the authors claim to have these features but implementation results are not shared with the readers.
Ray et al. [5] aimed to design a low powered portable device named 'Checkmate' which was a foldable stick attached with different sensors and power source. The HC- SR04 ultrasonic sensor was used to detect any obstacle that arrives in front of the blind person and the user was alerted via a voice message. To detect potholes and speed breakers,
an ultrasonic and a pressure sensor were employed. ATmega328 8-bit microcontroller was the brain of Checkmate device which was responsible for all sorts of operation. If the pre-stored values were more than current values then it indicated a bump but if the current values were greater, than it indicated as a pothole. Patel et al. [6] proposed an electronic aid system consisted of two ultrasonic mounted at top and bottom of a stick to detect the obstacle and potholes in the surface by calculating a threshold value and comparing current value and threshold value. The user was notified by a vibration output when any hindrances was determined. Singh et al. [7] proposed a smart assistive stick that detect obstacle from the wide range with the help of three ultrasonic attached to the stick and alert the user through voice message if any obstacle is occurred near 100m. A pothole was recognized using one ultrasonic sensor at the bottom of the stick when the ultrasonic value increases than the threshold value. Kedar et al. [8] proposed a smart stick that detected nearby obstacle by placing two ultrasonic sensors at middle and end of the stick. Potholes were detected by bottom ultrasonic and user was alerted by different level of buzzer sound. When water sensor sensed any wet surfaces, it caused change in resistance which indicated the processor about the hazard and informed the user via buzzer sound.
Few works related to the design and implementation of walking aids involving Raspberry pi as SBC are available in the literature [9], [10], [11]. Raspberry pi based system offers improved accuracy over Arduino based system [9]. These works however mostly focused on obstacle detection and don't include pothole and bump detection feature.

Overview of Proposed System
This section of the paper presents the abstract level view and overall working principle of the proposed. The block diagram of the electronic travel assistant is shown in Fig. 1. Raspberry pi board is the heart of the system which is interfaced with three ultrasonic sensors and a wet floor sensor as the input devices. The Raspberry pi implements all the algorithms which are programmed using python language. The ultrasonic sensors help to detect the obstacles, potholes and bumps by measuring the distances. In the output side, it is interfaced with a buzzer and a vibration module. The system is powered by a 9V rechargeable battery.

Fig. 1: Overview of electronic travel assistant

Components of the Proposed System
Our proposed system consists of two different kinds of sensors that help us to achieve the desired goal. In the following section, a brief discussion about these sensors is presented.
Ultrasonic Sensor:
Ultrasonic sensor is a distance measuring component which is the eye of the proposed device. We have used HC- SR04 ultrasonic sensor because of its low cost, decent accuracy and easy to use features which makes it perfect choice for our device. It works on sonar method and has 4 pin including a transmitter & a receiver modules and is shown in Fig. 2. When the power supply is provided, eight
40 kHz sound wave are transmitted to hit the necessary object and reflected wave is detected by the receiver module. The distance is measured by the following general formula
Distance = (time * Speed of sound)… (1)
Using (1), we get the measurement of total travelled path of the wave which is twice of the distance between the obstacle and the source. To get the actual distance we have divided the whole distance by 2.

Fig. 2: HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensor

Raspberry Pi:
The Raspberry pi is a low cost; small form factor computer which allows us to program and builds various applications at very ease. We have used Raspberry pi 3B+ which has a Quad core 1.2 GHz Broadcom 64-bit ARM cortex A53 CPU along with display interface, camera interface, HDMI port, on board Bluetooth [12] and more other features which make this device suitable for our proposed electronic travel assistant. The code of the Raspberry pi based prototype is developed using Python language. Pictorial view of such a board is given in Fig. 3.


Fig. 3: A Raspberry Pi 3B+ single board computer

Buzzer:
A buzzer is a small but very important output device which is used in this project to generate audible alerts when a wet surface is detected. We have used a small PCB mountable 5V passive buzzer. It operates on 5V supply, makes use of a coil to generate an audible tone. Fig. 4 shows the picture of an off-the-shelf available buzzer.


Fig. 4: A buzzer

Wet Surface Detector:
There isn't any appropriate off-the-shelf wet surface detector in the market which we can be directly interafced with the proposed stick. So we have designed the wet suraface detector with the help of two copper wires which are fitted on the bottom cap of the stick. As soon as the two copper electrode come in the contact of water or similar liquid, the current flows through the wires and activates the buzzer. The circuitry for wet surface detection is shown in Fig. 5 below.

Fig. 5: Circuit diagram for detection of wet surface


Vibration Module:
Vibration module is another output device that gives non-audible indication to alert the user about the obstacle ahead of them and is shown in Fig. 6. We have used DC vibration motor module which operates in 5v DC supply having high rated speed of 9000 rpm. It has a coin size flat motor that provides the sensation of vibration similar to Smartphone vibration. The length, width and weight of this sensor are 23.5mm, 21mm, and 3gm which make it more compatible and light weighted for our device. It also work with single board computer like Raspberry pi effortlessly.

Fig. 6: A picture of vibration module with vibration motor
Proposed Prototype
The complete circuit diagram of the proposed system is presented in Fig. 7 where interfacing between the Raspberry pi board and three ultrasonic sensors, a wet surface detection module, a Buzzer, and a Vibration motor is demonstrated.

Obstacle Detection:
In the proposed system, we have used ultrasonic sensors to collect real world data and measure the distance from nearby objects. These sensors detect obstacle present in the
forward path of visually impaired persons and alert them so that they can avoid the obstacle. The ultrasonic sensor (US) sends a sound wave at a specific frequency toward the obstacle and receives the reflected wave from it. To perform this operation, we placed an ultrasonic sensor in a breadboard and connected it with the Raspberry pi board to calculate the distance. The Raspberry pi is programmed in python language to perform the operation. There is a vibration motor connected to the Raspberry pi which provides a vibrational sensation and alerts the user if any obstacle occurs in the path. The working principle of obstacle detection has been described by the algorithm shown in Fig. 8.


Fig. 7: Complete circuit diagram of the proposed system


Pothole and Bump Detection
Two ultrasonic sensors (US1 and US 2) are used for potholes and bump detection which are placed at an angle of 30 degree [13] w. r. t. the stick. US1 is placed at 70cm whereas US2 is placed at 50cm from the bottom of the stick for improved results. Ultrasonic sensors are connected to Raspberry pi using jumper wires and breadboard. The Trigger pin of US1 is connected to Raspberry pi's GPIO pin no. 23 and echo is connected to GPIO pin no. 24. Similarly US2 is connected to pin no. 14 (trigger) and pin no. 15 (echo) of the Raspberry pi. For alerting the user we have connected vibration module as an output device. The proposed algorithm for pothole and bump detection has been described in Fig. 9. At first ultrasonic sensors measure the distance from the ground continuously. We stored the value of average difference of distances of US1 and US2 from the ground to stick so that we can set a threshold value to detect the potholes or bumps. Whenever the current measured difference of ultrasonic devices is greater than the threshold value, it is identified as a pothole. On the contrary, if the measured difference is less than the reference value it is considered as a bump. According to the detected condition, the user is informed through the vibratory signal.
Water Detection
The surface of the path if covered with liquid, the blind person might step in the wet surface and may cause accident. To deal with the problem, we have designed and attached a water detection module wherein two copper wires at the bottom of the stick are used as electrode to detect liquid on the surface. When the stick touches any wet surface, water in the surface will act as a conductor and it will allow the current to flow through the water and complete the circuit connection which results in buzzer sound. The module has been successfully tested and implemented.


Fig. 8: Obstacle detection mechanism



Results and Discussion
The real time experimentation is performed to verify the functionality of the proposed electronic travel assistant. Results so obtained in the Shell window of Python platform of Raspberry pi OS have been presented and analyzed in this section. The time complexity of the proposed algorithm is
O(n). The ultrasonic sensor used to find obstacle keep on looking for it within the detection range of 300cm. As per the proposed algorithm, if any obstacle appears within the range of 200cm, the Raspberry pi displays the message "OBSTACLE DETECTED" in the shell window as shown in Fig. 10. The vibration motor gets activated and informs the user about the presence of an obstacle. If the distance between the sensor and the obstacle is higher than 200cm, no message is displayed and the vibration motor also remains inactive. The intensity of the vibration motor is lesser when the object is far and vice versa. Fig. 11 demonstrates the detection of a pothole. When the user with the stick goes near to any pothole, the US1 and US2 placed on the stick calculate the distance between the stick and the
ground surface. When the difference of the measured value is more than the stored reference value i.e. 50cm, the message "POTHOLE DETECTED" appears. In response, the vibration module alerts the user again. Detection mechanism of a bump is described in Fig. 12. When the prototype come across a bump, the difference of the distance measured by US1 and US2 becomes smaller than the reference value, i.e. 70cm, the message "BUMP DETECTED" is displayed and the vibration motor informs the user about the presence of bump. The hardware prototype so developed is presented in Fig. 13.


Fig. 9: Pothole/bump detection algorithm



Fig. 10: Result of obstacle detection

Fig. 11: Result of Pothole detection


Fig. 12: Result of Bump detection

The error analysis in three distance cases each for obstacle, pothole and bump detection are presented in Table
I. The average error percentage is the lowest (less than -2%) for obstacle detection, lower (less than 6.3%) for bump detection and low (less than 8.2%) for pothole detection.
Table II shows a comparative analysis with similar recent implementations to demonstrate the contribution and superiority of this work. Most the other works listed below did not share result analysis data to find the error percentage except [5] which also lacks in data related to range of detection. Our work uses a high end SBC like Raspberry pi which provides faster performance, improved results and opportunity for future upgradation to make the system more sophisticated and robust.
TABLE I. Error Percentage Computation During Measurement

Types of object
Actual
distance in cm
Measured
distance in cm
Error percentage
Average Error
percentage

Wall (obstacle)
200
197.17
-1.41

-1.46
150
148.02
-1.34
100
98.41
-1.62

Pothole
70
76.42
8.4

8.19
60
65.44
9.07
50
53.82
7.10

Bump
90
96.36
6.60

6.29
80
85.43
6.36
70
74.40
5.92


Fig. 13: Final Prototype

TABLE II. Comparative Analysis Between Various Similar Works
Conclusion
The main objective of this project work is to develop an assistive support system for visually impaired people so that they can move in indoor as well as in outdoor environment independently without facing barrier. The obstacle detection system of the proposed prototype detects the presence of hindrances in the surroundings which is demonstrated in the result section. The pothole and bump detection system indicates the presence of potholes or bumps on the ground surface. The water detector activates the buzzer whenever it comes in the contact of a wet surface. The proposed prototype is built around a Raspberry pi board which work as the heart of the system, ultrasonic sensors for distance measurement of obstacles, wet surface detection module to identify slippery floor condition, vibration module and buzzer as the output device. The device has been successfully implemented and tested for different obstacle scenario. Presence of obstacle, pothole and bump are communicated to the visually impaired person through a vibration motor, whereas the indication of wet floor is passed on using a buzzer. Detailed error analysis and comparison with few recent works have been made to highlight the contribution of this research work.
References

S. Reporter, "62 million in India visually impaired," The Hindu, 09 June 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/chennai/62-million-in-india- visually-impaired/article27699902.ece. [Accessed 09 June 2022].
M. Murali, "3,500 road accidents last year due to potholes: Govt tells Parliament," The Hindu, 17 December 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/potholes- sparked-over-3-500-road-accidents-last-year-govt-tells-parliament- 101639711131500.html. [Accessed 09 June 2022].
N. Dey, A. Paul, P. Ghosh, C. Mukherjee, R. De and S. Dey, "Ultrasonic Sensor Based Smart Blind Stick," in 2018 International Conference on Current Trends towards Converging Technologies (ICCTCT), Coimbatore, India, 2018.


M. P. Agrawal and A. R. Gupta, "Smart Stick for the Blind and Visually Impaired People," in 2nd International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies, Coimbatore, India, 2018.
A. Ray and H. Ray, "Smart Portable Assisted Device for Visually Impaired People," in International Conference on Intelligent Sustainable Systems (ICISS), Palladam, India, 2019.
S. Patel, A. Kumar, P. Yadav, J. Desai and D. Patil, "Smartphone- based obstacle detection for visually impaired people," in International Conference on Innovations in Information, Embedded and Communication Systems (ICIIECS), Coimbatore, India, 2017.
S. Singh, S. Singh, S. Sekhar and J. C, "Smart Blind Stick For Visually Impaired People," International Journal of Creative Research Thoughts (IJCRT), vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1523-1529, 2018.
P. Kedar, P. Rane and D. Singh, "Smart E-Stick for Visually Impaired using Mobile Application," Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR), vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 143-147, 2019.
M. Khanom, M. S. Sadi and M. M. Islam, "A Comparative Study of Walking Assistance Tools Developed for the Visually Impaired People," in 1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering and Robotics Technology (ICASERT), Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2019.
V. S. S. Kaushalya, K. D. D. P. Premarathne, H. M. Shadir, P. Krithika and S. G. S. Fernando, "Automated Help aid for Visually Impaired People using Obstacle Detection and GPS Technology," International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 579-583, 2016.
I. J. L. Paul, S. Sasirekha, S. Mohanavalli, C. Jayashree, P. M. Priya and K. Monika, "Smart Eye for Visually Impaired-An aid to help the blind people," in International Conference on Computational Intelligence in Data Science (ICCIDS), Chennai, India, 2019.
R. P. Foundation, "Raspberry Pi 3 Model B," Raspberry Pi Foundation, [Online]. Available: https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b/. [Accessed 09 June 2022].
H. Sharma, M. Tripathi, A. Kumar and M. S. Gaur, "Embedded Assistive Stick for Visually Impaired Persons," in 9th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), Bengaluru, India, 2018.