Chapter 14
Inclusive Design in Higher Educational Institutes for People with Disability

Priyanka Yadav, D. Udaya Kumar, and Sougata Karmakar



Abstract Concepts of universal design are gradually making its roads in the design and development of public spaces (airports, shopping malls, metro-railway stations, 
 etc.) and public utilitarian facilities (ATM, ticket vending machines, telephone 
 booths, etc.). Although the educational institutions are an essential category of the public space, it is still deprived of harnessing the benefits of universal design in the majority of the countries. When infrastructures are created for educational institu- tions' buildings, due considerations are given for architectural space layout, strength
 and stability of the architectural structure, aesthetics and functional aspects, sustain- 
 ability parameters, etc. Barrier-free environments are created mainly for wheel- chair users to make the institutional space inclusive to accommodate physically challenged/specially-abled stakeholders (students, teachers, supportive staffs, and visitors). Still, the requirements of different types of specially-abled people are not aptly addressed to make the built-space inclusive. Here, it is worth mentioning that the difficulties due to their various limitations among specially-abled people are diverse. Thus, all these necessities are to be addressed collectively in the infrastruc- ture of an educational institute. Besides infrastructures, various assistive aids are crucial to facilitate quality education among specially-abled stakeholders. Through a systematic review, the current research aimed at determining the extent to which the issues/problems of the specially-abled stakeholders have been addressed in the design and development of infrastructures and assistive aids in educational institutes.


Introduction

More than one billion of world populations have some form of disability, estimated to be 15% of the whole population [1]. According to the Census of India 2011, the population of India was 1.2 billion, of which 26 million people are disabled/ specially-abled, which makes up to 2.21% of the Indian population. Many families are reluctant to share data about their specially-abled family members; this results in


P. Yadav · D. Udaya Kumar · S. Karmakar (B)
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam 781039, India e-mail: karmakar.sougata@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
A. Chakrabarti et al. (eds.), Design for Tomorrow–Volume 2, Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies 222, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0119-4_14




165
lesser reported data than originally existing [2]. This data does not include children, pregnant women, people with strollers, and the elderly who are also required to be included to make a building inclusive [3].
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Person with Disability (CRPD) article 1 states that "disability results from the interaction between persons with impairments and attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinders their full and effective partic- ipation in society on an equal basis with others". Lin et al. [4] acknowledged that equal accessibility for persons with disabilities has become an important area that has led to increased awareness globally. This awareness gave way to the need to improve current knowledge on the interaction of disability and built environment [5].
Evcil [6] concluded that moving through a city safely and independently is every citizen's right, so is accessing built environment. If the built environment is not inclusive, opportunities for social integration are lost. However, accessibility is an issue that is not going to vanish, but the conditions can be improved by evolving designers' awareness about it [6]. Heylighen et al. [7] explained that universal design, inclusive design, and design for all are design approaches that aspire to include a range of users. In this article, inclusive design will be used as an umbrella term, as it reflects collective design approaches directly. By keeping diverse abilities into account, the built environment can be made to provide opportunities and spatial qualities to people through inclusive design [7].
Facilities are created mainly for wheel-chair users to make the institutional space inclusive to accommodate physically challenged/ specially-abled stakeholders (students, teachers, supportive staffs, and visitors). Still, the requirements of different types of specially-abled people are not aptly addressed to make the built-space really inclusive. Through a systematic review, it is aimed at current research to determine the extent to which the issues/problems of the specially-abled stakeholders have been addressed in the design and development of infrastructures and assistive aids in educational institutes all over the globe.


Methodology

A detailed literature search was conducted using the online Scopus and Web of Science database to shortlist papers using suitable keywords and their combinations. These keywords were associated with different aspects of universal design, physically challenged/specially-abled and, infrastructures for educational institutes. Apart from research papers, various Govt. reports and guidelines/ standards related to universal design have also been explored. Available information was segregated and presented under different headings and sub-headings to show the state-of-the-art review.
Various Challenges Faced by People with Disability

Besides residential spaces, there are types of public buildings that are accessed by different types of disabled population. Considering the built environment, population with disabilities can be categorized as wheelchair-bound, sensory disabled, ambulant and temporarily disabled [3]. The description of the categories is provided in Table 14.1.


Public Buildings and Environments

Kadir and Jamaludin [3] highlighted that standards and codes are majorly used for measurement of a building's accessibility for wheelchair-bound users. The other types of disabled users are hardly considered for defining space allocations in a building. It is suggested that a study from a diverse user's point of view will be beneficial for refining the existing standards. The following procedure was carried out:
Each participant was chosen from each category like sensory disabled, wheelchair- bound, ambulant and temporarily disabled who were from related institutions of disabilities. Five public buildings that get high footfall from diverse users were marked for study. They were asked to assess 15 facilities which were ("1. PWD 
 Parking Space, 2. Pedestrian Pathways, 3. Guiding Blocks, 4. Ramp, 5. Main 
 Entrance, 6. Door and Doorways, 7. Interior Pathways, 8. Information Counter, 9. 
 Stairways, 10. Elevators, 11. Escalators, 12. Signage, 13. Praying Room and Ablu- 
 tion Area, 14. Public Restroom, 15. PWD Restroom") and emergency escape of the building. Then they were asked to give their feedback on building's comprehensive accessibility.
The result of the audit was that the level of ease of accessibility varied based on the type of disability of the participant. Visually impaired users gave the least rating for satisfaction; the result shows that the design considerations were concentrated on the needs of wheelchair-bound users, while users with sensory disabilities were neglected. In conclusion, Kadir and Jamaludin [3] insisted on the need to make

Table 14.1 Categories of disabled people [3]
inclusive buildings so that people with varied disabilities can be catered to. It also suggests to warrant an inclusive environment in built spaces. A thorough study in the application of inclusive design in architecture is required, as it will also be able to include users with unseen abilities such as children, pregnant mothers, people with strollers, library staff carrying a stack of books, and the elderly [3].
Commercial buildings. Accessibility study of shopping complexes in Malaysia done by Hashim et al. [8] indicated that the accessibility in buildings is required to be improved to provide a better quality of life for the disabled population [8]. Bromley et al. [9] assessed commercial complexes in Malaysia involving people with different disabilities. It gave satisfactory result from the perspective of accessibility. However to improve the quality of life of disabled people, improvements were recommended. In a review done by Calder et al. [10] to assess public indoor fitness centres on universal accessibility parameters, in which 10 out of 14 studies were from USA. It was identified that accessibility of fitness center was poor for people with disabilities [10].
Service sector. In many countries, large restaurants have to be abided by the laws to have accessibility but small and medium restaurants are not required by law to provide accessible environment. This ends up creating a service gap between possible person with disability customers and small and medium restaurants [4]. Wazzan [11] did a study to evaluate, establish and document disabled friendliness of accessible hotel rooms, surveyed the complaints regarding accessible hotel rooms. They concluded that the accommodations needed to suit different types of disabilities but because of lack of consideration in standards made it hard to achieve. These issues arise because of neglecting principles of human factors accommodations [11].
A study by Tutuncu [12] brought it to notice that hotel satisfaction of person with physical disabilities is connected to forms of assistive devices, disability types and accessibility factor. Different physical disabilities cause different range of issues, characterization and identification of all possible impediments to accessibility is challenging. Hotel satisfaction is suggested to be predictable by accessibility of 
 rooms, bath in rooms, public areas, recreation areas, areas of food and beverages. As every physical disabled person experiences disability differently, it can affect their hotel satisfaction as well. Researchers concluded that people with acquired disabilities, wheelchair-bound users and powerchair users are the most disadvantaged in terms of accessibility and it may become the reason of poor hotel satisfaction [12].
Travel and transportation. Community integration can be achieved through good accessible design practices that are safe, accessible and efficient and that caters to the need for visually impaired, hearing impaired and people with reduced mobility [13, 14]. A study done on a bus and metro barrier-free system, highlighted the importance of maintaining the barrier-free facilities and administering them so that these can be fully utilized by the disabled and elderly population [15]. Besides the maintenance of resources, the Aarhaug and Elvebakk [16] had the opinion that the accessibility should be available "from door-to-door, not only from bus stop to bus stop" [16].
Darcy [17] explains that for wheelchair-bound travellers, their impaired body and their management for it; assistive aid they use; an accessible built space and acces- sible customer service attitudes, these four components make up their embodiment for themselves. While air travel, if any of these components are disrupted because of air travel chain's inaccessible services, travelers find themselves as "(DIS)embodied 'nature of being'", where their citizenship is removed by damaging their inde- pendence and dignity [17]. These studies represent the ignorance that person with disability endure because of inaccessible built environments and facilities.
Recreation. Darcy and Dickson [18] presented the case of accessible tourism by examining the concept of whole-of-life approach. They analyzed the relationship between tourism, access, aging, and disability. Followed by reviewing accessible tourism and places from the perspective of universal design and explored the legis- lations that shape the future of accessible tourism in Australia [18]. Mullick [19] discussed the accessibility in National Park and points out the aesthetic, economic, and ecological implications of providing greater access in natural environments, concluding that there is a need to define policies to prevent misuse of natural resources [19].
According so the survey by Lovelock [20], which was done on 400 tourists and residents with mobility disabilities and able bodied. It was carried out to study the desire for accessing wild spaces. The survey concluded that the people with disability showed similar enthusiasm for tourism in wild spaces, but the inaccessibility keeps such spaces out of their reach [20].


Institutional Buildings and Environments

An audit was done by Osman et al. [21] at the University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, by surveying the campus for facilities provided for people with disabilities. It aimed to check the campus area based on standards and opinions of people with disabilities on the facilities provided in the campus area and provide recommendations to improve the accessibility of the campus using the users' perceptions. It was found that the campus was not able to follow the inclusive design in some areas as pathways were inaccessible, and since most of the respondents were visually impaired, they were found having issues with the signage system because it was making wayfinding hard for them [21].
Stetieh [22] in a similar study, done at the University of Jordan, used interviews with students, staff members, and other stakeholders. The analysis unveiled that users faced problems in class and campus. Peer and lecturer related issues, e.g., hearing-impaired student was not able to concentrate as they were bothered by the
 background noises and were unable to follow the lecture if the lecturer was not facing them and was not able to use the induction loop out of fear of standing out from peers. Some issues were based on unfavorable weather conditions such as water clogging; it caused problem for cane using blind students and ramps became slippery because
of snowfall. Other issues were emergency alarms not being favourable for hearing impaired, as a faculty suggested incorporating lights in emergency alarms [22].
Ambati and Ambati [23] found inaccessible built spaces as a hindrance in educa- tional experiences of students with disabilities, though the focus was on the change that is required in policies to improve management of colleges. They suggest that by providing supporting disability coordinator who can assist and help students with disability in getting assistive devices or interpreters campus can become accom- modating for students with disability. They also recommended that there should be funding provided for technical training of staff to help in getting academic success [23].
Taking a new approach by interviewing 119 faculty members who follow inclu- sive pedagogy, from 10 Spanish universities, Morina and Orozco [24] based their qualitative study on barriers and aids in learning and participation. Bureaucracy and social stigma were emphasized as hindrances in accessibility while it was suggested that the rigidity of the curriculum should be relaxed to make education inclusive. This approach might help in supporting the students with different abilities because they have a different pace from abled-bodied students [24].
Lopez-Gavira et al. [25] in a four-year-long multidisciplinary study included experts from different fields (educational sciences, economics, health sciences, exper- imental sciences and humanities). The study was done on 44 students with disability, for the purpose of knowing the perspective of university students toward the required improvements in classrooms. The key requirements for improvements were acces- sible spaces, change in teaching methods to make them more accessible, and the necessity of trained teachers, so that they are able to provide help to students with different needs [25].
A quality of life assessment was done on a sample size of 203 handicapped students, integrated into higher educational institutions. Through the survey, it was revealed that with the physical barriers, students were also facing issues in context of course and the delivery of it. These issues made the students to report their quality of lives to be dissatisfactory. Nandjui et al. [26] suggest that the change can be brought by providing financial measures to these students and by improving the legislations in their favor [26].


Institutional Architectural Spaces and Stakeholders

Study by Raheja and Suryawanshi [27] done at Jawaharlal Nehru University in India, focusing on the informal spaces, concluded that these spaces play a major role in creating a cohesive social structure for students [27].
Raheja and Suryawanshi [27] defined educational campuses as a complex, city- like structure composed of people from varied cultures, genders, castes, sizes, and abilities. User mapping was used before the assessment to define stakeholders from the perspective of accessibility in an educational campus setting (Fig. 14.1) [28].
User mapping

Students Faculty Staff Children Elderly Guests/Visitors
Fig. 14.1 User mapping framework for the educational campus. Source Inclusive strategies for universal access in an educational campus environment


Ceresnova [29] suggests that introducing inclusive design in the course of students can sensitize them for people with varying needs; it could improve the future of inclusive design as students are the main stakeholders of the future [29].


Existing Design Guidelines for Architectural Spaces and Buildings for Specially-abled People

European Committee for Standardisation compiled a report for analysing accessi- bility in the built environment. Klenovec and Isabela [30] inspected the feasibility of existing European and international standards, building codes, technical regulations, and guidance documents for inclusive buildings. The study highlighted that there are little data and guidance available for the issues faced by people with sensory disabilities and learning difficulties than what is available for people with motor disabilities.
It pulls the attention to the shortfalls of efficient and adequate conformity assess- ment and enforcement processes currently in force. These shortfalls make intro- ducing new and existing regulations, guidance documents, mandates, and directive redundant and as a result the situation of accessibility in-built environment stays stagnant.
Klenovec and Isabela [30] call for change in the education system by introducing courses on Universal Design or Accessibility to sensitize the stakeholders in building industry, i.e., construction engineers and architects. It was concluded on the basis of a survey done on 336 European universities that offer architectural courses in which only 5% were providing obligatory lectures on Universal Design or Design for All [30].
Existing Facilities and Assistive Devices which could be Used to Facilitate Specially-abled Stakeholders
in the Institutional Scenario

To complete course requirements through improving their abilities, people with disabilities need to use assistive technologies in the educational campus [23]. Assis- tive technologies for accessibility and learning used by people with different abilities are discussed below:
Partially sighted or visually impaired: Visually impaired people need the following
 aides for learning such as magnifying lenses, large print, Braille books, Braille embossers, audio recorder, information in electronic format, Information and Communication Technology (ICT), Optical Character Recognition software, elec- tronic readers, Video magnifiers and magnification software, speech output systems (Job Access With Speech (JAWS)) and electronic Braille devices [31]. Assistive devices required for accessibility in the built-environment are white cane, elevators 
 with tactile buttons, and emergency alarm with sound notifier [22, 32].
Hard of hearing or hearing impaired: Devices required for learning for hearing impaired people are hearing-aids and induction loop. Emergency alarm with visual 
 indicators is required for an inclusive built environment [22].
Speech Impaired: Assistive device required while learning is augmentative or 
 alternative communication devices [33].
Physically impaired: Assistive devices for accessibility are crutches or four-point
 cane, walkers, manual and powered wheel-chairs. For upper extremity reacher and 
 grabber, mechanized page-turners for reading and add-on enlarged handles for 
 writing [34] are available.


Research Gap and Way Forward

The paper is an attempt to investigate the existing relevant studies on the condition of accessibility in higher educational institutes. It is an effort to provide exclusive data on disability issues in institutes on the level of policies for disabled stakeholders, social inclusivity, and guidelines for the inclusive built environment.
The existing studies fail to discuss the requirements of assistive technology for people with different disabilities. They also lag to identify exclusive requirements of people with visual, hearing, speech, and physical impairments for learning and accessibility in educational institutes.
Further research in the area of inclusiveness of architectural space and assistive facilities for people with disability in higher educational institutions can examine following research questions:
What are the issues that a person with disability faces in their everyday life?


Fig. 14.2 User mapping framework for the educational campus. Source Inclusive strategies for universal access in an educational campus environment


What are the issues that are specific to built environment?
What are the existing guidelines that are followed to make a built environment accessible?
What are the assistive devices that are being used in the context of higher education by people with disabilities?
Identification of the challenges faced by person with disability in higher education institutes and a systematic research on assistive facilities and guidelines that are available in other domains can be the aim of further study. The aim could be achieved through following objectives (Fig. 14.2).
To identify the research gap and frame appropriate research questions to understand people with disability.
To identify the challenges faced by people with disability in higher educational institutes.
To study exiting design interventions and assistive facilities available.
To propose and develop design interventions with favourable guidelines.
To validate the effectiveness of developed design interventions and appropri- ateness of guidelines for providing assistive facilities.
Scott et al. [35] suggested that while systematic research on universal design in higher education institutes is encouraged, it is also recommended to collaborate and utilize the experience of professionals across boundaries.
It will be beneficial in the Indian scenario to emulate the strategies of including professionals from different fields (i.e., architects, engineers, designers, and building managers, etc.) with disability advocates and users from institutes while the design is in primary stages. These collaborations and discussions will direct the discussions
on inclusive design further and untangle the issues underneath that are acting as a hindrance to the development of inclusive environments.


Discussion

The study draws attention to different aspects that are important to attain inclusivity in higher educational institutes. While the studies used similar qualitative methods to collect primary data, such as questionnaire, the results were dependent on the domain of study such as analysis of built space, universal learning, pedagogy and analysis of factors causing inaccessibility in a campus. The general issues mentioned are as follows:
Issues in signage. 
Inaccessible parts of campus.
Inaccessible pathways. 
Peer and faculty behaviour and support.
Role of disability coordinator and management of the institution.
The renovations being done failed to facilitate PWD adequately.
Students feeling disabled in absence of required facilities.
Building guidelines being focused on wheelchair-bound, ignoring sensory disabilities.
Social stigma and anxiety of being seen as taking advantage of the system through their disability.
Students reported to have low quality of life, and there was no significant difference if students with physical or sensory disabilities.
These studies helped in defining the issues that stakeholders with disability face, but they are focused on one institute and its built environment. One study exam- ines ten public colleges, but it is focused on pedagogy and faculties' view on the condition of disabled students [24]. The literature is missing regarding the combined perspective of different stakeholders that play a major role in designing, managing and maintaining the institute, i.e., architects, policymakers, disability coordinators, and faculties, as they all play a major part in making an institute inclusive.


Conclusion

There are different factors affecting inclusivity in higher educational institutions. These factors depend upon policies at the level of campus management, stakeholders in campus (i.e., disability coordinators, faculty, support staff, students), availability of assistive devices (hearing aids, cane) or technology (digital study material, Infor- mation Communication Technology), built structure (i.e., elevators, ramps, stairs, 
 classrooms) and built environment (i.e., signage, wayfinding, ease of accessibility),
the social environment around the person with disabilities, financial factors and universal design in learning. From the perspective of a designer and architect, it limits the focus on built structure, built environment, and assistive technology.
In the context of Indian educational institutes, there is a need to build guidelines for bringing inclusivity in the built environment, as the current guidelines are defined focusing on the requirements of people with physical disability while the needs of people with other disabilities are ignored.
Designers, engineers, and architects should focus their research to address this relatively ignored domain of making the public space like academic insti- tutions universal in nature to overcome the limitations of specially-abled toward enabling them as an equal independent part of the society without the feeling of separation/segregation.
By providing inclusive design in a built environment, the barriers between disability and education can be broken. This will clear the path for an inclusive and diverse society and workforce.


References

who.int: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/disability-and-health. Last accessed 2020/05/29
livemint.com: https://www.livemint.com/Opinion/1rx8tSYGwHB0ZRsvdNFiBP/Indias-mis sing-disabled-population.html. Last accessed 2020/05/29
Kadir, S.A., Jamaludin, M.: Users' satisfaction and perception on accessibility of public buildings in Putrajaya: access audit study. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 50(July), 429–441 (2012)
Lin, P.M.C., Peng, K.L., Ren, L., Lin, C.W. : Hospitality co-creation with mobility-impaired people. Int. J. Hospital. Manag. 77, 492–503 (2019)
Lid, I.M., Solvang, P.K.: (Dis)ability and the experience of accessibility in the urban environment. Alter 10(2), 181–194 (2016)
Evcil, A.N.: Raising awareness about accessibility. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 47, 490–494 (2012)
Heylighen, A., Van der Linden, V., Van Steenwinkel, I.: Ten questions concerning inclusive design of the built environment. Build. Environ. 114, 507–517 (2017)
Hashim, A.E., Samikon, S.A., Ismail, F., Kamarudin, H., Jalil, M.N.M., Arrif, N.M.: Access and accessibility audit in commercial complex: Effectiveness in respect to people with disabilities (PWDs). Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 50(July), 452–461 (2012)
Bromley, R.D., Matthews, D.L., Thomas, C.J.: City centre accessibility for wheelchair users: the consumer perspective and the planning implications. Cities 24(3), 229–241 (2007)
Calder, A., Sole, G., Mulligan, H.: The accessibility of fitness centers for people with disabilities: a systematic review. Disabil. Health J. 11(4), 525–536 (2018)
Wazzan, W.: My accessible room is not accessible, applying human factors: principals to enhance the accessibility of hotel rooms. Procedia Manuf. 3(AHFE), 5405–5410 (2015)
Tutuncu, O.: Investigating the accessibility factors affecting hotel satisfaction of people with physical disabilities. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 65, 29–36 (2017)
Soltani, S. H. K., Sham, M., Awang, M., Yaman, R.: Accessibility for disabled in public transportation terminal. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 35, 89–96 (2012)
Zajac, A.P.: City accessible for everyone - improving accessibility of public transport using the universal design concept. Transp. Res. Procedia 14, 1270–1276 (2016)
Wu, C., Li, X.: Using community planning method to improve effect of urban barrier-free transportation system. Transp. Res. Procedia 25, 4330–4337 (2017)
Aarhaug, J., Elvebakk, B.: The impact of universally accessible public transport-a before and after study. Transp. Policy 44, 143–150 (2015)
Darcy, S.: (Dis)embodied air travel experiences: disability, discrimination and the affect of a discontinuous air travel chain. J. Hosp. Tourism Manag. 19(1), 91–101 (2012)
Darcy, S., Dickson, T.J.: A whole-of-life approach to tourism: the case for accessible tourism experiences. J. Hospit. Tourism Manag. 16(1), 32–44 (2009)
Mullick, A.: Accessibility issues in park design: the National Parks. Landsc. Urban Plann. 26, 25–33 (1993)
Lovelock, B.A.: Planes, trains and wheelchairs in the bush: attitudes of people with mobility- disabilities to enhanced motorised access in remote natural settings. Tour. Manage. 31(3), 357–366 (2010)
Osman, M.M., Radzi, F.H.M., Bakri, N.I.M., Ibrahim, M.: Barrier-free campus: University Malaya, Kuala Lumpur. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 168, 134–144 (2015)
Stetieh, H.: An evaluation of the School of Engineering buildings at the University of Jordan with regard to accessibility. Sustain. Cities Soc. 42, 240–251 (2018)
Ambati, N., Ambati, H.: Paradigm shift in German disability policy and its impact on students with disabilities in higher education. Int. J. Soc. Sci. Interdis. Res. 2(4), 22–42 (2013)
Morina, A., Orozco, I.: Spanish faculty members speak out: Barriers and aids for students with disabilities at university. Disabil. Soc. 1–20 (2020)
Lopez-Gavira, R., Morina, A., Melero-Aguilar, N., Perera-Rodríguez, V.H.: Proposals for the improvement of university classrooms: the perspective of students with disabilities. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 228(June), 175–182 (2016)
Nandjui, B.M., Alloh, D.A., Manou, B.K., Bombo, J., Twoolys, A., Pillah, A.: Quality of life assessment of handicapped students integrated into the ordinary higher education system. Annales De Readaptation Et De Medecine Physique 51(2), 109–113 (2008)
Raheja, G., Suryawanshi, S.: Inclusive informal campus spaces through universal design India principles. Assist. Technol. Res. Ser. 35, 195–203 (2014)
Raheja, G., Suryawanshi, S.: Inclusive strategies for universal access in educational campus environments. Incl. Des. (2014)
Ceresnova, Z.: Student engagement in assessment of universal access of university buildings. Incl. Des. 143–151 (2014)
Klenovec, M., Isabela, N.: Accessibility in built environment. Comité Européen de Normali- sation, Europe (2011)
Mutula, S., Majinge, R.M.: Information behaviour of students living with visual impairments in University libraries: a review of related literature. J. Acad. Librarianship 42(5), 522–528 (2016)
Manjari, K., Verma, M., Singal, G.: A survey on assistive technology for visually impaired. Internet of Things 11, 100188 (2020)
Simion, E.: Augmentative and alternative communication—support for people with severe speech disorders. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 128, 77–81 (2014)
Johnson, K.L., Dudgeon, B., Amtmann, D.: Assistive technology in rehabilitation. Phys. Med. Rehabil. Clin. North America 8(2), 389–403 (1997)
Scott, S.S., Loewen, G., Funckes, C., Kroeger, S.: Implementing universal design in higher education: moving beyond the built environment. J. Postsecondary Educ. Disabil. 16(2), 78–89 (2003)