8
INCREASING ADAPTIVE
CAPACITY OF VULNERABLE POPULATIONS THROUGH
INCLUSIVE DESIGN
Jordana L. Maisel, Brittany Perez and Krista Macy



Who Is Most Vulnerable?
Older adults (i.e., individuals 65 years of age) and people with dis- abilities are regularly identified as populations that are more vul- nerable to environmental stressors due to climate change than the general population (Gamble et al. 2013; Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2017). Approximately 14.5% of the U.S. population are currently 65 years and older (Colby and Ortman 2017). Projections indicate that the number of older adults is expected to double from 43.1 million in 2012 to an estimated 83.7 million by 2050 (Ortman, Velkoff, and Hogan 2014). This population shift is largely due to the aging baby boom generation, as well as advances in medicine and technology that contribute to increased longevity among older Americans. This is particularly apparent in the projected increase in the population of 85 years and older (Pray et al. 2010). Moreover, most of the nation's old- est population is clustered in the Northeast; 8 of the top 11 states with the oldest populations are in the Northeast, with many of the most senior-heavy areas located in the Great Lakes region. Projections in- dicate this trend will continue and grow rapidly since this region has been losing residents, particularly younger people, to other places for generations (Kotkin 2016; Wilson 2013).
The rapidly aging population will further increase the prevalence of disability. About 13% of the civilian non-institutionalized US popula- tion (about 41 million people) report having a severe disability (Brault 2012). Among the total population, 44 million (13.9%) have difficulty with self-care, independent living or ambulation, 19.1 million (6%) have difficulty with vision or hearing, and 15.5 million (4.9%) have dif- ficulty with cognitive functioning (Lauer and Houtenville 2018). In the past 30 years, there has been a sixfold increase in wheeled mobility device users—up to 4 million. Another 12 million people use walking aids (U.S. Census Bureau 2012). People with disabilities and their fam- ilies are particularly in need of adaptation and coping strategies to minimize the harmful effects of climate change and ensure they have


DOI: 10.4324/9781003030720-8

access to basic necessities, health care, social support, and opportu- nities for social participation.
Older adults and people with disabilities, who also belong to other minority groups based on gender, race, or ethnicity, may experi- ence greater exposure to climate stressors. They may also face ad- ditional disadvantages in having their needs met during and/or after a weather-related event (GPDD and The World Bank 2009). For ex- ample, race—specifically African American—is frequently cited as an indicator of reduced adaptive capacity (Shirley, Boruff, and Cutter 2012). Gerontologists point out that older African American women are exposed to a triple threat to their quality of life. Each demo- graphic category—gender, minority status, and age—increases the likelihood that a person will have lower disposable income, worse health, and other low quality of life outcomes (Washington, Mox- ley, and Taylor 2009). Older adults and people with disabilities living in poverty may not only experience greater exposure to the effects of extreme temperatures and other climate stressors (e.g., lack of resources for an air conditioner, poor housing conditions, etc.), but may also lack the financial resources to prepare for and respond to climate-related events (e.g., insurance, purchasing supplies, home repairs). Thus, older adults and people with disabilities, who are fur- ther marginalized by gender, race, ethnicity, or income, may expe- rience more significant and complex barriers in response to climate stressors. The disproportionate impact of climate change on these groups will worsen unless municipalities adopt inclusive strategies to increase building and community resilience.

Additional Factors Contributing to Vulnerability
Numerous physiological, psychological, and contextual factors fur- ther increase the sensitivity and exposure of older adults and peo- ple with disabilities to climate stressors, and impair their ability to cope with the adverse impacts of climate change. Although many older adults are healthy and active, aging is often accompanied by an increased risk of certain diseases and disorders such as impaired breathing, increased susceptibility to infectious diseases, and cardio- vascular disease (Gamble et al. 2013). Early exposure to air pollution and toxins may compromise individuals' immune systems and cause respiratory impairments. For example, air pollution can exacerbate asthma and symptoms of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Individuals with diabetes are at a greater risk for heat-related morbidity and mortality than the general population. This is particu- larly concerning since the prevalence of diabetes is growing among older Americans, with projections suggesting it could double by 2050. Older adults with cardiovascular impairments (e.g., heart dis- ease, hypertension) are also more sensitive to extreme temperatures since they have greater difficulty regulating their body temperature (Gamble et al. 2013).

Individuals, both young and old, with mobility, sensory, and cogni- tive limitations have reduced ability to respond to climate stressors. For example, people with mobility impairments (e.g., impaired bal- ance, decreased motor strength, wheeled mobility device users) may face additional physical challenges during extreme weather events if emergency response plans do not adequately anticipate and address the specific needs of these populations (e.g., accessible transporta- tion and shelters) (World Health Organization 2013). Individuals with poor hearing may not hear or comprehend important warnings or instructions related to climate stressors. Similarly, individuals with Alzheimer's and other cognitive impairments may experience diffi- culty receiving and comprehending warnings, as well as challenges with navigating complex recovery processes (Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2018).
Social isolation also impacts individuals' adaptive capacity to cer- tain climate stressors (Gamble et al. 2013; Zimmerman et al. 2009). Individuals with more social capital and stronger social networks are better equipped to manage climate stressors because they have bet- ter access to information, social support, and resources (Dolan and Walker 2006, Ebi and Semenza 2008). Consequently, older adults and individuals with disabilities who live by themselves may not receive critical emergency information; they may underestimate the sever- ity of a climate event; and/or they may be unaware of social services and community supports available to them (Gamble et al. 2008). Even some individuals with strong social support systems experience lone- liness and reduced adaptive capacity due to climate change stress- ors. For instance, natural disasters often disrupt social networks, eroding a key coping resource. Weather-related events may reduce the capacity of caregivers to provide for and support individuals with disabilities. In response, common psychological reactions to extreme weather disasters include depression, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and heightened family tension (Evans 2018).
Geographic factors may also influence the exposure and degree to which climate change affects older Americans and individuals with disabilities. For example, some locations with growing older adult populations are likely to experience greater climate stressors, such as hurricanes, floods, infectious diseases, and extreme temperatures. Approximately 20% of older Americans resided in a county where a hurricane or tropical storm was likely to make landfall between 1995 and 2005. Moreover, there appears to be a higher concentration of low-income older adults in these at-risk locations (Filiberto et al. 2010; Zimmerman et al. 2009). The large numbers of older adults in urban locations is also considered a risk factor for vulnerability to climate stressors since these areas are more prone to exacerbated summer heat; the lack of open land combined with buildings and impermeable surfaces creates a 'heat island effect' (Gamble et al. 2008). The grow- ing population of older Americans in the Northeast may be particu- larly vulnerable to extreme temperatures, coastal flooding/sea level

rise, the decline of air quality, and the spread of infectious disease/ pests–climate stressors predicted to increase and intensify in these regions.

Climate Stressors Impacting the Northeast
The Northeastern region of the U.S. is home to densely populated urban centers such as New York City, Boston, and Washington D.C., along with vast rural landscapes, supporting more than 180,000 farms (Horton et al. 2014; U.S. Global Change Research Program 2014). With a population of over 64 million people, this unique region is largely covered by forest, but is also well known for its bodies of freshwa- ter, coastal zones, beaches, wetlands, and grasslands (U.S. Global Change Research Program 2014). Although the built and natural environments vary greatly throughout this part of the U.S., weather events and climate stressors have exposed significant vulnerabilities that require attention. The most relevant climate stressors to this re- gion include extreme temperatures; coastal flooding, sea level rise, increased precipitation; air quality; and infectious disease, invasive species, and pests.

Extreme Temperatures
The global land and ocean surface temperature in 2017 was recorded to be 0.38°C–0.48°C above the 1981–2010 average, making 2017 warmer than any year in recorded history prior to 2015 (Blunden et al. 2018). This shift in temperature has led to an increase in the frequency, duration, and severity of heat waves (Meehl and Tebaldi 2004). One study, which collected temperature and mortality data globally from 400 communities, found that high temperatures cre- ate a substantial health burden. Variations in the observed mortal- ity rates related to heat waves between communities and regions demonstrate the importance of employing local heat wave response plans along with heat mitigation strategies in every community, even those thought to be low risk (Guo et al. 2017). While existing data il- lustrates an increase in average temperatures globally, extreme cold events remain prevalent and pose health and safety risks. Temper- atures are not expected to drop as a result of climate change; how- ever, winter storm frequency and severity are expected to increase as a result of higher ocean temperatures and an increased amount of moisture in the air (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis- tration 2014). For example, the frequency of severe snowstorms in the latter half of the 20th century is almost twice that of the previ- ous 50 years in the U.S. (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis- tration 2014). Western New York's 2014 winter storm 'Snowvember' serves as an example of a severe winter storm that brought with it increased amounts of snow, ice, and gusting winds. This resulted in power outages, building and infrastructure damage, and increased risk of travel.

Coastal Flooding/Sea Level Rise/Increased Precipitation
Flooding accounts for 90% of all natural disasters in the U.S. This is increasingly due to coastal flooding, storm surge, and rising sea levels (Horton et al. 2014; Rajkovich et al. 2018). Sea levels have risen ap- proximately 1 foot since 1900, and are projected to rise another 1–4 feet by 2100. This, combined with the predicted increases in precipi- tation, makes flooding a major concern going forward (Blunden et al. 2018; Meehl and Tebaldi 2004). Approximately, 1.6 million Northeast- erners reside within the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) 100-year coastal flood zone, further increasing vulnerabilities to building stock, infrastructure, economies, and, most importantly, the health and wellness of individuals residing in this region (Horton et al. 2014).

Air Quality
Changing temperatures, precipitation, atmospheric allergen lev- els, and humidity levels, along with natural disasters such as storm events, can strain mechanical equipment, increase the risk of mold growth indoors and out, and change vapor and pollution transmission through the building envelope. Indoor air quality is a critical issue be- cause the configuration of the building envelope, building systems, and the choice of materials can lead to pollution concentrations that are between 2 and 100 times greater than they are outdoors (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2016b). Compounding the prob- lem, people in industrialized countries spend as much as 90% of their time indoors (Klepeis et al. 2001). Finally, many people have chronic respiratory or cardiovascular diseases exacerbated by certain toxins (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2016a).

Infectious Disease/Invasive Species/Pests
The changing climate has resulted in impacts on the ecosystems and habitats of animal and pest populations, leading to shifts towards new or expanded habitats (U.S. Drug Administration 2014). This shift will continue to cause the increased spread of disease and invasive species to both vegetation and animal populations, leading to an increased health risk to humans, animals, and agriculture products alike (U.S. Drug Administration 2014). These climatic changes will influence the invasion and establishment of non-native diseases and agricultural pests (U.S. Drug Administration 2014).

Inclusive Design and Resilience
Inclusive design serves as a useful tool for addressing the needs of vul- nerable populations in response to intensifying climate stressors and increasing individual, building, and community resilience. Inclusive design is a holistic approach to the process of developing and creating

1 Inclusive design and univer- sal design are interchangea- bly used terms.
products, buildings, landscapes, systems, and cities. Designing for human diversity—in regard to age, gender, race, religion, personal- ity, and other factors—is central, particularly in addressing the wide spectrum of physical, sensory, and cognitive abilities that comprise society. Longer life spans, trends in disease and disability, and general demographic diversification of societies prompt the need for alterna- tive design processes and strategies. Significant changes in climate behavior are also demanding the need to rethink traditional design and policy practices. Inclusive design, or universal design,1 must be used in conjunction with other sustainable planning and design prac- tices moving forward in order to reduce the risk factors, exclusionary practices, and even neglect that vulnerable populations encounter in the midst of climate change.
The aim of inclusive design is frequently described in terms of out- comes, e.g., a product or building being functional for and usable by the greatest percentage of the population possible. Recognizing the need for a new, cross-cultural framework, Steinfeld and Maisel (2012) defined universal design as "A process that enables and empowers a diverse population by improving human performance, health and wellness, and social participation." What this definition adds to this outcomes-oriented framework is a view of inclusive design as a pro- cess, rather than as an end product or feature. The intention of in- clusive design, seen through this lens, then, is to identify and refine architectural ways of thinking and working that improve the self- efficacy and self-actualization of all built environment users.
To accompany and support this definition, Steinfeld and Maisel (2012) developed the eight Goals of Universal Design. The first four goals— Body Fit, Comfort, Awareness, and Understanding—incorporated research from anthropometry (the study of the size and move- ments of human bodies), human factors (ergonomics and sensory perception), and the health sciences (e.g., rehabilitation sciences). The fifth goal—Wellness—emerged from growing science on how the materials and forms of products, buildings, and environments not only affect usability but also affect health and well-being. The last three goals—Social Integration, Personalization, and Cultural Appropriateness—leveraged social-science research toward the rec- ognition that individuals have diverse needs, preferences, and aspi- rations, and that norms, taboos, and values differ across geographies and cultures, as do building codes and conventions.
The development of inclusive design research and practice is contem- poraneous with that of sustainability or 'green building,' and the two share considerable intellectual space. The concept of social sustain- ability is a sizeable area of overlap. Ultimately, social injustices and inequalities will have negative economic and environmental impacts. Another key similarity between inclusive design and green building is the emphasis on design process, including careful thinking about the formation of the design team and its consultants and stakeholders,

the sources and research used to guide decisions, and the steps for identifying hidden consequences and improving the likelihood of success. Inclusive design can be a powerful tool to build up a com- munity's adaptive capacity in general, and specifically to address the vulnerabilities of people with disabilities and older adults across vari- ous climate stressors. Responding to the needs of these communities requires more holistic and inclusive strategies that shift the paradigm from traditional design practices that have isolated and left behind these groups in the past.

Building Adaptive Capacity through Inclusive Design
The primary challenge for stakeholders engaged in climate resilience, such as inclusive designers, policy makers, and advocates, is to build environments, develop communication and education programs, and implement policies that meet people's evolving needs over the course of their lives. This is particularly true when addressing the needs of vulnerable populations before, during, and after climate-related events. Given that resilient strategies, plans, and policies are limited and often focus on the needs of able-bodied adults, the reward for these stakeholders is collaborating with climate resilience experts to expand standard practices and the populations they serve.

Built Environment
Some existing resilient strategies not only address climate hazards facing the Northeast, but also illustrate opportunities to integrate inclusive design. While some of these strategies serve to mitigate climate change, others result in increased resiliency. Regardless, the ultimate goal of identifying these approaches is to increase the ca- pacity for adaptation so that climate-related events do not impose a greater risk to often marginalized, vulnerable populations. The list of strategies is not exhaustive. Therefore, it should not serve as a man- ual; rather, its primary purpose is to provide designers and practition- ers with guidance to more thoughtfully incorporate inclusivity into the design of climate resilient strategies.
Although resilient building and planning strategies may vary be- tween hot and cold temperature extremes, health and safety risks to vulnerable populations, specifically those with limited resources and decreased thermal regulation, are exacerbated in both scenar- ios. Implementing inclusive design strategies can help minimize the negative impacts of these climate stressors. For example, in extreme heat or cold events government and community agencies often pro- vide cool or warm safe havens for individuals at risk. However, existing barriers, such as lack of accessible transportation or lack of aware- ness, leave a large percentage of the vulnerable populations for which these services exist, unable to utilize these resources. Programs such

as these can improve their effectiveness by considering the varying abilities of the targeted populations and putting in place systems that increase access to services. For example, they should improve their communication efforts and provide accessible transportation. Other inclusive resilient strategies to addresses extreme temperatures include:
Increase vegetation and tree cover: This strategy provides added shade and increases permeable surfaces, which help to reflect heat rather than absorb it, making the outdoors more usable during warm events. Conversely, during winter weather events, trees and vegetation help to decrease the effects of wind gusts and blowing snow.
Increase accessible permeable pavement: This strategy mitigates the effects of the urban heat island effect, similar to vegetative ground cover. However, it also provides accessible pathways for those with limited mobility.
Install accessible, easy to use, operable windows with shading devices: This strategy provides building users with the ability to utilize pas- sive methods of cooling independently, with the added benefits of decreased energy use, increased ventilation, and improvements to indoor air quality.

Health and wellness risks from flood events related to water damage, mold growth, air quality, and water contamination due to strain on aging infrastructure often last long after floodwaters have subsided. While it is important to implement mitigation strategies to limit this damage, recovery and emergency response actions should be designed to better support vulnerable populations following these events. For example, resilient recommendations, following the 2012 Superstorm Sandy, are called for the raising of coastal buildings well above storm surge levels. While this is an effective means to protect coastal building stock, it poses accessibility barriers and increases risk for those with mobility impairments. Therefore, the organiza- tions and agencies responsible for these recommendations need to consider and recommend accessible and inclusive features, such as
 ramps and site planning to allow for on grade entry, in order to better serve and protect all building users. Other inclusive resilient strate- gies to address coastal flooding/sea level rise/increased precipitation include:
Install automatic solar- and/or battery-powered emergency lighting: This strategy provides additional visibility during power outages, which often occur concurrently with flood events. Individuals with vision impairments may have difficulty maneuvering through a non-illuminated space while looking for additional safety light- ing, or may have difficulty seeing with the limited illumination of a flashlight.
Implement permeable planters, pavement, and rain gardens along paths 
 of travel: This strategy mitigates excess storm water, combined

sewage overflow (CSO), and standing water following heavy pre- cipitation events. Standing water and CSOs along paths of travel can create barriers to accessible mobility.
Utilize natural grading and slope: While this strategy may take more time and effort at the early stages of a design, it has the added benefits of maximizing natural drainage and minimizing required site work and grading. Accessible building features should be de- signed around these natural elements to better improve safety and access.

Individuals with limitations that make them unable to leave their homes or individuals who are institutionalized may be disproportion- ately exposed to poor indoor air quality due to the various conditions previously described. Designers should consider how the building envelope and mechanical systems in these homes and facilities will perform over time as the atmosphere continues to warm and storm events become more frequent (Ilacqua et al. 2015; Institute of Medi- cine 2015). Resilient recommendations suggest improving air quality through increased building ventilation. However, institutional build- ings, and in some cases homes and apartments, lack easy to use op- erable windows. If planners recommend increased ventilation, details within this strategy must also include the installation of more usa- ble windows; otherwise, the most vulnerable populations will more acutely suffer the consequences of poor air quality.
 Integrated Pest Management (IPM) serves as an example of a univer- sally designed resilience strategy. IPM is a mitigation strategy that fo- cuses on prevention of harmful diseases, species, and pests through the use of the most effective, lowest risk options by considering risks to the applicator, building occupants, and environment (U.S. Envi- ronmental Protection Agency 2016c). Unlike traditional pest control, which relies primarily on the use of toxic pesticides, IPM programs take a more inclusive and holistic approach, by taking advantage of all appropriate pest management methods. For example, it factors in sanitation, building maintenance, removal of standing water, instal- lation of pest barriers, and the judicious use of pesticides (Kass et al. 2009). IPM is not limited to just one method, but rather involves iden- tifying the specific problem (the problematic pest, disease, or spe- cies), and determining the best preventative measure with the lowest risk of harming humans and/or the surrounding ecosystem (U.S. Envi- ronmental Protection Agency 2016c).

Education and Communication
As climate stressors continue to increase and intensify, education and communication efforts targeting vulnerable populations must also in- crease in order to build stronger community-based adaptive capacity. Older adults and individuals with disabilities, previously unaffected or minimally affected by climate stressors, may be underprepared for future intensifying stressors. They are often unaware of how climate

stressors could affect their short-term and long-term health out- comes. Consequently, few seek educational information to help them prepare for and/or recover from weather-related events. In addition, people living with certain health conditions require more specific ed- ucational information than what is typically distributed to the gen- eral public (Ebi and Semenza 2008). For example, people who have high-level spinal cord injuries often have difficulty or the inability to perspire, putting them at greater risk during a heat wave. Educational materials for this population should include information about bet- ter climate control in the home, nearby accessible cooling shelters, and accessible transportation to access the cooling shelters. Similarly, individuals who use mobility devices may require information about
 wheelchair accessible shelters or shelters that will have other medical 
 necessities available if the need to evacuate arises. Beyond educating vulnerable populations, planning and policy stakeholders should also improve their own education efforts to learn more about the vulnera- ble communities they serve and represent.
To educate both the general public and vulnerable populations effec- tively, stakeholders must have access to relevant, accurate, and ac- cessible weather-related information for their specific needs (World Health Organization 2013). An inclusive education and communication strategy involves diverse users in the development process. Engaging community residents helps ensure that messages reflect the needs and abilities of both the general public and specific vulnerable popula- tions (Ebi and Semenza 2008). Stakeholders charged with developing and disseminating critical information can collaborate with different accessibility experts; area agencies for aging; senior centers; disability advocacy organizations; and/or independent living centers, local gov- ernmental disability offices, and community advocacy organizations to develop and review education and communication strategies. Partner- ships with these organizations can help provide professional trainings on the specific needs of different populations.
Ongoing education and emergency-related communication efforts must also be available in multiple formats so that people who have varying communication needs receive critical information related to living in a changing climate, preparing for emergencies, and recov- ering from emergencies. At a minimum, all forms of public, climate stressor-related communication and information should comply with standards for information and communication technology (covered by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act and Section 255 of the Com- munication Act) (U.S. Access Board 2017). A more inclusive approach to effective communication ensures that all public communication is available in multiple written formats and languages and through di- verse in-person, virtual, and media-based outlets. An inclusive com- munication strategy that integrates the Goals of Universal Design may help reduce the disproportionately negative impact of climate stressors for people with disabilities and older adults by equipping them early and often with useful information.

The weakened adaptive capacity of older adults and people with dis- abilities may not be due to insufficient educational resources or ser- vices, but instead due to a lack of awareness that these programs and education materials exist (Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2018). Com- munication is one of the most significant barriers for vulnerable pop- ulations related to climate stressors and weather-related disasters (Gamble et al. 2013, World Health Organization 2013). Climate-related communication efforts are often inaccessible to many populations, and predominantly disseminated only using mainstream media out- lets. Using inclusive and participatory approaches to educational outreach strategies ensures effective dissemination of important in- formation. Partnerships established to help develop education mate- rials can also help facilitate community outreach.
Greater access to technology increases the potential range of adapta- tion options available to communities, and therefore increases their adaptive capacity (Dolan and Walker 2006). As education and com- munication efforts increasingly rely on technology for widespread dissemination, understanding and improving how communities and 
 vulnerable populations access and utilize technology remains critical. This ensures that people with limited access to technology are not further alienated or put at greater risk of climate-related stressors and weather disasters. Community assessments can provide valuable insight into how technology use varies across age groups, income lev- els, geographic regions, etc., and how best to target specific popula- tions. For example, in a community assessment of older adults in Erie County, New York, technology use for communication varied signifi- cantly by age. Older adults between the ages of 50 and 75 more fre- quently used mobile phones and text messaging, while older adults age 75 and over more frequently used postal mail and home tele- phones. Despite these differences, a majority of older adults reported frequent use of email, suggesting high access to the Internet across all old age cohorts (Age Friendly Erie County 2018). A similar study in Connecticut engaged older adults in community discussions and surveys and found that older adults preferred phone and in-person warnings for weather emergency information (Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2018).

Policy
As policy makers throughout the Northeast and Great Lakes region continue to learn about escalating climate stressors affecting these areas, they need to evaluate and assess their current resilience pol- icies and practices. An inclusive, community-based approach to resilience requires both a top-down and bottom-up approach to health, safety, and hazard policies (Ebi and Semenza 2008). In the top-down approach, policy makers must evaluate and confirm that existing mainstream emergency operations, disaster risk reduction services, and other resilience policies and practices address the needs

of vulnerable populations. Analyzing disaggregated data from na- tional, state, or local surveys can help identify and locate where older adults and people with disabilities live, if they use special equipment, and/or their transportation behaviors (McGuire, Ford, and Okoro 2007). This helps reduce the number of people excluded from needs assessments, outreach, and recovery efforts (World Health Organiza- tion 2013). Policy makers also have the opportunity to introduce and implement new policies and programs such as Complete Streets and Age Friendly Communities that enhance social resilience and improve a community s ability to respond to climate-related stressors. These policies provide built environment guidelines that support more inclu- sive and livable communities. In addition, policy makers can mandate tools like innovative solutions for Universal Design (isUD ), which is a set of strategies for creating more inclusive buildings, along with LEED or other sustainable design approaches, to increase a commu- nity's adaptive capacity during reconstruction.
Policy makers should not rely on secondary data or assume they know the unique and diverse needs of older adults and people with disabili- ties in their communities. Using a bottom-up approach, policy makers should work with the local community and people from vulnerable groups to review current policies and identify opportunities for inte- grating inclusive resilience strategies that address disaster events, emergency responses, and rebuilding and recovery efforts (Dolan and Walker 2006). Together, they must ensure that individualized support policies address the specific needs and requirements of older adults and people with disabilities (Lewis et al. 2011). Policy development and evaluation must therefore take a participatory approach that includes and empowers vulnerable populations to create solutions. Older adults and people with disabilities often have significant ex- perience negotiating adversity and overcoming barriers; therefore, they have the lived expertise to critically inform resilience policies (Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2018). In addition to contributing to these adaptive capacity strategies, people in these vulnerable pop- ulations can also be powerful climate activists and help with climate mitigation efforts to reduce carbon emissions, climate change educa- tion, and emergency planning (Lewis et al. 2011).
A recent community-based research approach in Connecticut demon- strated the benefits of engaging diverse stakeholders in conversations about resilience. In-person participatory meetings asked older adults about their climate-related needs, as well as how these stressors af- fect them. Researchers also distributed a survey, in both English and Spanish, asking about older adults' levels of concern across various extreme weather-related issues. The results helped inform adaptation strategies and planning efforts in their community. The researchers plan to repeat this process, with various populations, to build an even greater inclusive adaptive capacity approach to resilience (Rhoades, Gruber, and Horton 2018). In Portland, Oregon, the City Repair Project engaged the community in implementing various interventions that

addressed heat islands. Individuals who participated in the implemen- tation efforts had higher self-reported ratings of health and social cap- ital outcomes when compared to individuals who did not participate (Ebi and Semenza 2008).

Conclusion
Climate stressors affecting the Northeast are increasingly exposing older adults and people with disabilities to health and safety risks. These vulnerable populations are already at greater risk due to phys- iological, economic, and geographic factors. Advocates and policy makers must understand and amplify the needs of older adults and people with disabilities in response to climate stressors in order to build stronger resilience strategies. Individual, built environment, and community-based approaches to building adaptive capacity are needed. Although research explores climate change and the factors contributing to vulnerability, limited research examines how inclusive design can address the needs of these vulnerable populations, while also providing resilient solutions for the general population. Integrat- ing inclusive designs and practices in the built environment, commu- nication and education efforts, and policies not only builds resilience for climate-related stressors and weather-related disasters, but also strengthens community resilience for a wider range of significant challenges that may arise.

References
Age Friendly Erie County. 2018. Age Friendly Erie County Community Assess- ment. IDeA Center, Erie County Senior Services.
Blunden, Jessica, Derek S Arndt, and Gail Hartfield, Eds. 2018. State of the Climate in 2017. In Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society.
Brault, Matthew W. 2012. Americans with Disabilities: 2010. US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau Washington, D.C.
Colby, Sandra L, and Jennifer M Ortman. 2017. "Projections of the Size and Composition of the US Population: 2014 to 2060: Population Estimates and Projections."
Dolan, AH, and IJ Walker. 2006. "Understanding Vulnerability of Coastal Communities to Climate Change Related Risks." Journal of Coastal Research 39:1316–1323.
Ebi, Kristie L, and Jan C Semenza. 2008. "Community-Based Adaptation to the Health Impacts of Climate Change." American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35(5):501–507. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.018.
Evans, Gary W. 2018. "Projected Behavioral Impacts of Global Climate Change." Annual Review of Psychology 70:449–474.
Filiberto, David, Elaine Wethington, Karl Pillemer, Nancy Wells, Mark Wysocki, and Jennifer Parise. 2008. "Older People and Climate Change: Vulnerability and Health Effects." Generations 33:19–25.
Gamble, Janet L, Bradford J Hurley, Peter A Schultz, Wendy S Jaglom, Nisha Krishnan, and Melinda Harris. 2013. "Climate Change and Older Americans: State of the Science." Environmental Health Perspectives 121(1):15.

Gamble, JL, KL Ebi, DH Grambsch, FG Sussman, and TJ Wilbanks. 2008. "Analyses of the Effects of Global Change on Human Health and Welfare and Human Systems: Final Report, Synthesis and Assessment Product
4.6." Report by the US Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommit- tee on Global Change Research. Washington, D.C., US, p. ix [204 p].
Global Partnership for Disability & Development (GPDD) and The World Bank (Human Development Network – Social Protection/Disability & Develop- ment Team). 2009. The Impact of Climate Change on People with Disabilities. Guo, Yuming, Antonio Gasparrini, G Armstrong Ben, Benjawan Tawatsupa, Aurelio Tobias, Eric Lavigne, Stagliorio Coelho Micheline de Sousa Zanotti, Xiaochuan Pan, Ho Kim, Masahiro Hashizume, Yasushi Honda, Leon Guo Yue- Liang, Chang-Fu Wu, Antonella Zanobetti, D Schwartz Joel, L Bell Michelle, Matteo Scortichini, Paola Michelozzi, Kornwipa Punnasiri, Shanshan Li, Lin- wei Tian, Osorio Garcia Samuel David, Xerxes Seposo, Ala Overcenco, Ariana Zeka, Patrick Goodman, Ngoc Dang Tran, Van Dung Do, Fatemeh Mayvaneh, Nascimento Saldiva Paulo Hilario, Gail Williams, and Shilu Tong. 2017. "Heat Wave and Mortality: A Multicountry, Multicommunity Study." Environmental
Health Perspectives 125(8):087006. doi: 10.1289/EHP1026.
Horton, R, G Yohe, W Easterling, R Kates, M Ruth, E Sussman, A Whelchel, and D Wolfe. 2014. "Ch. 16: Northeast." In Climate Change Immpacts in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment, edited by JM Melillo, Terese (TC) Richmon, and G Yohem. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
Ilacqua, Vito, John Dawson, Michael Breen, Sarany Singer, and Ashley Berg. 2015. "Effects of Climate Change on Residential Infiltration and Air Pollution Exposure." Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology 27, 16–23.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. Climate Change, the Indoor Environment, and Health. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. https://www.nap. edu/catalog/13115/climate-change-the-indoor-environment-and-health.
Kass, Daniel, Wendy McKelvey, Elizabeth Carlton, Marta Hernandez, Ginger Chew, Sean Nagle, Robin Garfinkel, Brian Clarke, Julius Tiven, Christian Espino, and David Evans. 2009. "Effectiveness of an Integrated Pest Man- agement Intervention in Controlling Cockroaches, Mice, and Allergens in New York City Public Housing." Environmental Health Perspectives 117(8): 1219–1225.
Klepeis, Neil E, William C Nelson, Wayne R Ott, John P Robinson, Andy M Tsang, Paul Switzer, Joseph V Behar, Stephen C Hern, and William H Engel- mann. 2001. "The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A Resource for Assessing Exposure to Environmental Pollutants." Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology 11(3):231.
Kotkin, Joel. 2016. "America's Senior Moment: The Most Rapidly Aging Cities." Forbes, February 16, 2016. https://www.forbes.com/sites/joelkotkin/2016/ 02/16/americas-senior-moment-the-most-rapidly-aging-cities/#34af 716353e5.
Lauer, EA, and AJ Houtenville. 2018. "2017 Annual Disability Statistics Com- pendium." Institute on Disability, University of New Hampshire.
Lewis, David, Strategic Programmes Director, CBM Australia, Kath Ballard, and Inclusion Matters. 2011. "Disability and Climate Change: Understand- ing Vulnerability and Building Resilience in a Changing World." Develop- ment Bulletin.
McGuire, Lisa C, Earl S Ford, and Catherine A Okoro. 2007. "Natural Disasters and Older US Adults with Disabilities: Implications for Evacuation." Disas- ters 31(1):49–56.

Meehl, GA, and C Tebaldi. 2004. "More Intense, More Frequent, and Longer Lasting Heat Waves in the 21st Century." Science 305(5686):994–997. doi: 10.1126/science.1098704.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2014. Climate Change and Extreme Snow in the U.S. Accessed 2018. https://www.ncdc.noaa. gov/news/climate-change-and-extreme-snow-us.
Ortman, Jennifer M, Victoria A Velkoff, and Howard Hogan. 2014. An Aging Nation: The Older Population in the United States. United States Census Bureau, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Department of Commerce.
Pray, L, C Boon, EA Miller, and L Pillsbury. 2010. Providing Healthy and Safe Foods as We Age: Workshop Summary. Washington, D.C.: National Acade- mies Press.
Rajkovich, Nicholas B, Michael E Tuzzo, Nathaniel Heckman, Krista Macy, Elizabeth Gilman, Martha Bohm, and Harlee-Rae Tanner. 2018. Climate Resilience Strategies for Buildings in New York State, edited by New York State Energy Research Development Authority (NYSERDA). Albany, New York.
Rhoades, Jason L, James S Gruber, and Bill Horton. 2017. "Developing an In- Depth Understanding of Elderly Adult's Vulnerability to Climate Change." The Gerontologist: 58(3):567–577.
Rhoades, Jason L, James S Gruber, and Bill Horton. 2018. "Developing an In- Depth Understanding of Elderly Adult's Vulnerability to Climate Change." The Gerontologist 58(3):567–577. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnw167.
Shirley, W Lynn, Bryan J Boruff, and Susan L Cutter. 2012. "Social Vulnerabil- ity to Environmental Hazards." In Hazards Vulnerability and Environmental Justice, 143–160. Edited by Susan L. Cutter. Routledge.
Steinfeld, Edward, and Jordana Maisel. 2012. Universal Design: Creating Inclu- sive Environments. John Wiley & Sons.
U.S. Access Board. 2017. "Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compli- ance Board 36 CFR Parts 1193 and 1194 RIN 3014–AA37 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Standards and Guidelines AGENCY: Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board. ACTION: Final Rule." Federal Register 82(11).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. Anniversary of Americans with Disabilities Act: July 26. In Profile America Facts for Features. https://www.census.gov/ newsroom/facts-for-features/2021/disabilities-act.html.
U.S. Drug Administration. 2014. USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Climate Adaptation Plan 2014, edited by Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2016a. "Emergency Response for Drinking Water and Wastewater Utilities." Last modified May 20, 2016, accessed July 5, 2016. https://www.epa.gov/waterutilityresponse.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2016b. "Indoor Air Quality." Accessed May 13, 2016. https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2016c. "Introduction to Integrated Pest Management." [web page]. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, last modified April 20, 2016, accessed July 11, 2016. https://www.epa. gov/managing-pests-schools/introduction-integrated-pest-management.
U.S. Global Change Research Program. 2014. 2014 National Climate Assess- ment. Washington, D.C.
Washington, OGM, DP Moxley, and JY Taylor. 2009. "Enabling Older Home- less Minority Women to Overcome Homelessness by Using a Life Manage- ment Enhancement Group Intervention." Issues in Mental Health Nursing 30:86–97.

Wilson, Reid. 2013. "The Northeast is Getting Older, and It's Going to Cost Them." The Washington Post, September 12, 2013, GovBeat. https://www. washingtonpost.com/blogs/govbeat/wp/2013/09/12/the-northeast-is- getting-older-and-its-going-to-cost-them/?noredirect=on&utm_term=. c09b96199037.
World Health Organization. 2013."Guidance Noteon Disabilityand Emergency Risk Management for Health." Geneva: World Health Organization. Availa- ble at http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/preparedness/disability/en 5: 2013.
Zimmerman, Rae, Carlos E. Restrepo, Becca Nagorsky, and Alison M. Culpen. 2007. "Vulnerability of the Elderly During Natural Hazard Events." In Pro- ceedings of the Hazards and Disasters Researchers Meeting, pp. 38–40.