An official website of the United States government Here's how you know 
United States Department of Transportation


Search

Home / Public Roads

Explore Research and Technology


Research Resources Overview Public Roads Magazine 
Public Roads - Winter 2021
Date: Winter 2021
Issue No: Vol. 84 No. 4
Publication Number: FHWA-HRT-21-002



Technology to Make Signalized Intersections Safer for Pedestrians with Disabilities
by Govindarajan Vadakpat, Stephen F. Smith, Zachary B. Rubinstein, and M. Bernardine Dias
Transportation and mobility are key to quality of life, equity of opportunity, and economic well-being in urban environments. Yet for travelers with disabilities, navigation along city streets and access to public transportation present significant challenges and often impose severe limits on freedom of movement and the ability to accomplish normal daily activities. To explore the role of technology in addressing these challenges, the Federal Highway Administration established the Accessible Transportation Technologies Research Initiative (ATTRI).
Search Public Roads

Enter Search Term(s):


Current Issue



Subscribe to Public Roads




Contact Us TaMara McCrae Editor-in-Chief
Turner-Fairbank Highway
Research Center
6300 Georgetown Pike
McLean, VA 22101
United States
Email: PublicRoads@dot.gov

Pedestrians with vision or mobility impairments face challenges when crossing intersections. FHWA's Accessible Transportation Technologies Research Initiative is funding the development of the PedPal app to help.


One focus of the ATTRI program is the problem of safe intersection crossing. "For a pedestrian who is vision impaired, navigating intersections poses a particularly daunting task," says Mohammed Yousuf, the director of the Federal Transit Administration's Offce of Infrastructure and Innovation, and formerly the program manager for ATTRI at FHWA.
Most frequently, the pedestrian must rely on the directional sounds of traffc to first orient him or herself to the intended crossing direction and then to determine when it is time to cross. These decisions can be facilitated in situations where other pedestrians are present or if the intersection is equipped with accessible pedestrian signals, which provide audible and vibrotactile cues. In the absence of such cues when crossing unfamiliar intersections, a common strategy for a pedestrian who has a vision impairment is to remain at the intersection for one or more cycles of the traffc signal phases in order to acclimate and understand traffc patterns suffciently before making a move to cross. Once a decision is made to cross, the pedestrian generally moves as quickly as possible, using cues such as the crown of the road at the middle of the crossing to gauge progress. Despite his or her best efforts, the safety of a pedestrian with a vision impairment often depends on the alertness and accommodation of the drivers of oncoming vehicles.
For pedestrians who have a mobility impairment, the basic challenge is getting across the intersection in the time that is allocated by the traffc signal control system, and, again, safety often depends on the patience of the drivers of waiting vehicles as the traffc signal changes phases.
"For pedestrians with a combination of disabilities," says Yousuf, "the situation is even worse."
To help address these challenges, Carnegie Mellon University, with funding from ATTRI, developed PedPal, a mobile smartphone application that enables pedestrians to communicate directly with signalized intersections and to influence traffc control decisions to their advantage. PedPal combines emerging connected vehicle communication technology with a recently developed real-time, adaptive traffc signal control system to provide for a safer and more effcient intersection crossing experience for pedestrians with disabilities.
How PedPal Works
PedPal encodes its user's personal crossing constraints (such as travel speed) and conveys both desired crossing direction and required crossing time to the traffc signal system upon arrival at the intersection. The signal system, which is optimizing movement of all sensed traffc in real time, will in return ensure that the pedestrian gets the requested crossing duration whenever it initiates the next crossing phase in the pedestrian's direction. During crossing, PedPal and the traffc signal system communicate while PedPal monitors its user's progress, and, if progress is determined to be slower than expected, then the signal phase is dynamically extended by the signal system to accommodate this longer passage requirement.

A pedestrian who has a vision impairment waits at an intersection for the PedPal app on his smartphone to announce that it the light has changed and it is time to cross.


If the user provides PedPal with pre-planned route information, the traffc signal control system can anticipate the pedestrian's arrival time at the intersection. By factoring this information into its determination of the upcoming signal timing plan, the system will coordinate a more effcient crossing opportunity that streamlines the user's overall crossing time.
System Design
To realize the functional behavior, PedPal takes advantage of recent technology advances in two areas: (1) vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, which has produced both hardware devices such as dedicated short-range communication (DSRC) radios and V2I messaging standards, and (2) real-time adaptive signal control, which provides the ability to install personalized crossing constraints to dynamically extend the crossing time when necessary and to proactively factor pedestrian arrival times into the intersection's signal timing plan.

PedPal's overall system design supports both cellular and DSRC radio communication options.


PedPal is currently running on an iPhone, selected primarily for the accessibility features that it provides. With respect to V2I communication, the app provides both DSRC and cellular options, the former achieved via Bluetooth® communication between the smartphone and an attachable DSRC "sleeve," and the latter through a cloud-based server connection to the intersection. In both modes, standardized DSRC map data and signal phase and timing message types are used respectively to communicate relevant geometric information about the intersection (such as the number of lanes, lane width, etc.) and current phase information from the intersection (such as how much green time is left in the current crossing phase) to the PedPal app. Likewise, standardized signal request messages and signal status messages are used by PedPal to communicate crossing intent and requirements to the intersection.
For real-time adaptive signal control, PedPal currently relies on the recently developed Surtrac system, which was initially piloted and deployed in areas of Pittsburgh, PA, and is now operational in about a dozen North American cities. Surtrac is designed specifically for optimization of urban traffc networks, where there are multiple competing dominant traffc flows that change throughout the day.
Surtrac takes a totally decentralized approach to traffc control. Each intersection allocates its green time independently in real time, based on actual incoming vehicle flows, as seen through video or radar detection devices. Then, once an intersection system has generated its timing plan, it communicates projected outflows to neighboring intersections to increase their visibility of future incoming traffc.
Timing plans at each intersection are executed in "rolling horizon" fashion, and the planning cycle repeats every second. Reliance on decentralized intersection control ensures maximum real-time responsiveness to actual traffc conditions, while communication of projected outflows to downstream neighbors enables coordinated activity at the network level and creation of green waves when appropriate. The real-time intersection scheduling procedure is sensitive to travel mode information (such as passenger vehicle, bus, bicycle, pedestrian) and capable of multimodal optimization if sensors (and in this case the PedPal app) can provide mode information.




The PedPal Mobile App
The PedPal app is the interface between the pedestrian and the traffc signal control system. The developers designed it to promote ease of use and follow universal design principles while taking full advantage
of iPhone accessibility features to provide support for pedestrians with different types of disabilities. The interface emphasizes selection from tabs and lists of options rather than requiring textual inputs, and it provides multiple modalities to the user for presenting information and options for selection.
For pedestrians who are not vision impaired, the app's visual interface provides a straightforward basis for using the mobile app. Upon bringing up the app, the user has a choice of selecting one of two screens: "nearby," which provides the user with information and crossing options for the upcoming intersection, and "settings," which enables the user to customize the app's behavior for specific constraints and preferences. During travel and intersection crossing, the user will typically operate solely from the "nearby" screen.
Users who have vision impairments can enable the smartphone's native accessibility features–including voiceover, font resizing, and text zooming–and configure them to facilitate interaction. The current PedPal prototype is implemented for the iPhone (in large part because of the relative strength of its onboard accessibility features), but the developers anticipate Android implementation in the future. Finally, the PedPal app is also designed to exploit haptic (vibration-based) cues for announcing walk/don't walk crossing conditions and for issuing alerts during the act of crossing.



Volunteers from the local disability community in Pittsburgh tested PedPal in the field.

Volunteers from the local disability community in Pittsburgh tested PedPal in the field.


Field Experiments
Carnegie Mellon carried out initial field testing of the PedPal mobile app at multiple intersections in the existing Pittsburgh Surtrac deployment to assess the app's potential and to obtain feedback for additional development. The development team recruited 14 people from the local Pittsburgh disability community, spanning a range of demographics and disability types but including a disproportionate number of individuals who have vision impairments. The team first interviewed each participant to form an understanding of his or her current challenges when crossing traffc intersections. Then each participant was trained in the use of the PedPal app and asked to perform a number of crossing trials both with and without the assistance of the app.
The developers used the crossings without the app as a control study for comparison with each user's crossing performance when using the app. The team recorded several measurements for each crossing trial, including the amount of time the user waited upon arrival at the corner, the number of traffc signal cycles that the user waited through while preparing to cross, and the eventual crossing duration. After the trials, participants were asked to complete a survey designed to get their qualitative assessment of the technology and suggestions for improvement.

Volunteers from the local disability community in Pittsburgh tested PedPal in the field.

Volunteers from the local disability community in Pittsburgh tested PedPal in the field.


Overwhelmingly, the feedback from participants was positive. Although it was clear that the app was perceived to be of more benefit to individuals with specific types of disabilities (such as walker users and pedestrians with vision impairments), all participants were enthusiastic about PedPal's potential to increase safety and enhance mobility for pedestrians with disabilities. One participant observed, "I rely on my Seeing Eye® dog to safely guide me across ... street crossings, and my Seeing Eye dog relies on me to confidently give the command to initiate a crossing. The PedPal app gives me the information I need to make an intelligent decision at a crossing, eliminating the need to interpret the cacophony of vehicular cues, often the lack of vehicular cues, and the occasional misinformation from fellow pedestrians."
Dr. Tessa McCarthy, an orientation and mobility specialist at the University of Pittsburgh, was also enthusiastic. "The PedPal app is one of the most innovative tools for street crossings that I've seen in my career," she says. "It has the ability to solve a lot of problems related to street crossings for people with a variety of disabilities."
Quantitatively, the research team found that the use of PedPal reduced both the total wait time and the number of cycles needed to cross for participants who have vision impairments. However, these participants actually moved across the intersection at a slower, relaxed pace when using PedPal. Based on observations and post-trial
discussions with participants, this change in pace appears to correlate to the confidence users feel when crossing the street with the app: they feel more reassured that they are crossing at the correct phase and are less frantic in their movements as a result.
The observed results also confirmed prior expectations about the time required for crossing by different demographic groups. Individuals with mobility challenges who are walking require the most crossing time. Individuals who have vision impairments also require extra crossing time during periods of high traffc congestion. Alternatively, motorized wheelchair users and people with hearing loss cross intersections effciently and do not need extra crossing time.



A guide dog user crosses a busy intersection with the help of PedPal.


Next Steps
While a technological solution such as the PedPal app may not be right for every pedestrian, it can help many people with disabilities.
Carnegie Mellon is currently expanding the PedPal technology to
provide additional safety and mobility-enhancing capabilities, including the ability to detect veering outside of the crosswalk, to provide real-time feedback in an accessible format to pedestrians who have vision impairments, to import and export route information from third-party navigation apps, and to broadcast the presence of pedestrians with disabilities at the intersection to approaching connected vehicles. Carnegie Mellon is working with the company responsible for commercializing the Surtrac traffc signal control system to make the PedPal app available to any local municipality that has deployed Surtrac in the near future.
"The PedPal project has taken an important step toward realization of ATTRI's vision of an accessible transportation network that provides safe, easy, and effcient traveling options to everyone, especially to people with disabilities," says Yousuf.

Govindarajan Vadakpat is a highway research engineer at FHWA, where he managed the ATTRI safe intersection crossing project. He
holds a Ph.D. in civil engineering from Penn State.

Stephen F. Smith is a research professor of robotics at Carnegie Mellon University and principal investigator of the PedPal project. He
holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Pittsburgh.
Zachary B. Rubinstein is a principal project scientist at Carnegie Mellon University and project manager of the PedPal project. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
M. Bernardine Dias is a recognized world leader in the application of technology for social equity, and consulted on the PedPal project. She holds a Ph.D. in robotics from Carnegie Mellon University.
For more information, visit https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/50548 or contact Govindarajan Vadakpat at g.vadakpat@dot.gov or 202–493– 3283.





U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Federal Highway Administration
1200 NEW JERSEY AVENUE, SE WASHINGTON, DC 20590
202-366-4000
Subscribe To Email Updates

 





About About FHWA Careers
Org Chart
Staff Directories Work with Us
Programs
Acquisition Management Civil Rights
Federal Lands Highway
Infrastructure
Innovative Program Delivery Operations
Planning, Environment, and Realty Policy
Research, Development, and Technology Safety
Policies, Rights, Legal
About DOT
Budget and Performance Civil Rights
FOIA
Information Quality No FEAR Act
Oice of Inspector General Privacy Policy
USA.gov
Web Policies and Notices Web Standards
News & Events Newsroom Press Releases
Speeches & Testimony
Media Contacts Connect with Us